Project Gutenberg's The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898, by E. H. Blair

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898
       Volume X, 1597-1599

Author: E. H. Blair

Release Date: December 6, 2004 [EBook #14266]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, 1493-1898 ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the PG Distributed Proofreaders Team









The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898

Explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the islands and
their peoples, their history and records of the catholic missions,
as related in contemporaneous books and manuscripts, showing the
political, economic, commercial and religious conditions of those
islands from their earliest relations with European nations to the
close of the nineteenth century

Volume X, 1597-1599



Edited and annotated by Emma Helen Blair and James Alexander Robertson
with historical introduction and additional notes by Edward Gaylord
Bourne.




Contents of Volume X



    Preface ...   9
    Documents of 1597

            Letter to Felipe II. Antonio de Morga; Manila, June
            30 ...  25
            Administration of the hospital at Manila. L.P. Dasmariñas;
            Manila, July 20 ...  28
            Letters to Felipe II. Francisco Tello; Manila, April
            29-August 12 ...  41

    Documents of 1598

            Letter to Antonio de Morga. Juan de Ronquillo; Tanpaca,
            January 4  ...  53
            Report, of conditions in the Philippines. Antonio de Morga;
            Manila, June 8  ...  75
            Recommendations as to reforms needed in the islands.
            [Unsigned and undated; 1598?]  ... 103
            Reception of the royal seal at Manila. Francisco Tello,
            and others; Manila, June 8  ... 132
            Letters from the archbishop of Manila to Felipe II. Ygnacio
            de Santibañez; Manila, June 24 and 26  ... 141
            Letters from the bishop of Nueva Segovia to Felipe
            II. Miguel de Benavides; Manila, June 30 and July 5
            ... 161
            Letters to Felipe II. Francisco Tello; Manila, June
            17-July 9 ... 168
            Report of the Audiencia on the conduct of Tello. Antonio
            de Morga, and others; Manila, July 15 ... 183

    Documents of 1599

            Letter to the archbishop of Manila. Felipe III; Valencia,
            March 1 ... 189
            Letter from the bishop of Nueva Segovia to the king. Miguel
            de Benavides; Tulac, May 17 ... 190
            Letter to Joan de Ibarra. Miguel de Benavides; Afulu,
            May 22 ... 198
            Missions of the religious orders. Geronimo de Alearas;
            Manila, June 28 ... 204
            Military affairs in the islands. Francisco Tello, and
            others; Manila, July 12 ... 207
            Letter to the king. Francisco Tello; Manila, July 12
            ... 245
            Ordinances enacted by the Audiencia of Manila: Francisco
            Tello, and others; Manila, June, 1598-July, 1599 ... 293
            _(To be concluded.)_

    Bibliographical Data ... 317





Illustrations



    Autograph signature of Ignacio de Santibáñez, first archbishop
    of Manila; photographic facsimile from MS. in Archivo general de
    Indias, Sevilla ... 159
    Autograph signature of Francisco Tello; photographic facsimile
    from MS. in Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla ... 177





Preface


The present volume covers the years 1597-99, and is mainly occupied
with the details of the Philippine colony's internal affairs
and development Mindanao has been conquered, but proves to be an
unprofitable possession, except that the Spanish garrison there
serves as a check on the piratical Moros, who otherwise would harry
the Pintados Islands. Japanese pirates have menaced Luzón, and the
Chinese immigration needs frequent restriction. In the colony there
is much corruption in official circles and inaction and inefficiency
in the military. The new governor relates his efforts to improve the
condition of the city and administer the affairs of the islands;
but he is accused, especially by the ecclesiastics, of immorality
and tyrannical behavior, and of general unfitness for his office. The
Indians are oppressed in various ways; and some mutinies among them
have been suppressed. Formal submission to the Spanish crown is
required from the Indians; but this proves difficult to enforce. They
need more missionaries, who are to be sent. The usual discords between
the secular and ecclesiastical authorities still exist; and the
relations between Manila and Mexico are none too cordial. Complaint
is made of the trade recently begun with the Chinese at Canton.

A letter from Antonio de Morga (June 30, 1597) notifies the king
that the treasure-ship "San Felipe" has been wrecked on the coast of
Japan, and her cargo seized by the emperor of that country; this is
a heavy blow to the Philippine colony. Franciscan missionaries have
been crucified in Japan. Morga approves the reëstablishment of the
Audiencia in the islands.

Luis Perez Dasmariñas recommends (July 20, 1597) that the royal
hospital at Manila should be placed under the joint care of the
Franciscans and the Order of La Misericordia. He reports that the
religious are reluctant to do this, but that the confraternity approve
of the plan--except that they are unwilling to assume a financial
responsibility in a work which is, on their part, one of charity only.

A group of short letters from Tello to the king (April 29-August 12,
1597) relates various matters of interest. The conquest of Mindanao
has been practically effected. The numbers and power of the Chinese
in the islands have been greatly reduced. A rising of the Zambales
has been quelled. Insubordinate Spaniards have been punished; "on
New Year's day, I had the entire city council arrested for an act of
disobedience to me." Tello is improving the city, and is striving
to secure a good water-supply. He has imprisoned Dasmariñas, for
failure to equip the lost treasure-ship properly. The Japanese talk
of seizing Formosa, but the Spaniards are planning to forestall
them in this. The Chinese who slew some Spaniards en route to
Mindanao have been punished with death. It is reported that the
Spanish fort of Maluco has been seized by the natives. The natives
of Mindanao have rebelled (August, 1597), and reënforcements have
been sent thither to end the the Chinese, whom he views with some
suspicion. The Japanese trade requires regulation, especially that in
deerskins, which threatens to destroy the game. The sale of provisions
especially should be under government supervision. Sumptuary laws
and the prevention of gambling are required. Negroes should be kept
out. Building houses with wood should be prevented. The streets
need repairs. The officials take much advantage of their position,
and especially favor their dependents unduly. Military commissions
are given by favoritism. Soldiers are ill disciplined, ill paid,
ill lodged, demoralized, and in bad health. Military stores are badly
cared for; the very arquebuses in the armory are rotting, and there is
no preparation for emergencies. The ordinary magistrates pillage the
treasury, are oppressive, indolent, and corrupt, and take advantage
of their position to traffic; they are not sharply looked after. The
encomenderos are extortionate and fraudulent, take law into their own
hands, and fail to provide religious instruction for the Indians. The
royal exchequer and treasury is negligently and wastefully managed,
and insufficiently regulated. There are many sinecures, and not a
little fraud in offices. In the voyages to and from Mexico, many
frauds and illegal acts are committed by the officers of the vessels.

An interesting complement to Morga's report--all the more so because
it is apparently written by an ecclesiastic--is found in a document
unsigned and undated (but probably of 1598) which enumerates the
reforms needed in the islands. The writer advises that the usual
inspection of encomenderos and officials be made by the prelates
of the church, rather than, as hitherto, by laymen appointed by
the governor. He urges that fewer offices be provided, and that
each should have more extensive jurisdiction. The present system
is a heavy and increasing burden on the wretched Indians, who are
in danger of perishing; and causes much unnecessary waste to the
royal exchequer. The city should establish a storehouse, where rice
and other supplies should be kept in store for times of need. Thus
the natives would not be harassed, often at most unseasonable times,
to supply provisions for the Spaniards; both peoples can be aided in
times of famine, and prices can be better regulated. More care should
be used in selecting men to collect the tributes from the Indians;
and their appointment, as well as that of the lay protector of the
Indians, should be approved by the archbishop. The Indians who are
engaged in various labors for the Spaniards are often kept waiting
a long time for their pay, or even cheated out of it; when such pay
is due them, it should be sent to them promptly and safely. Rewards
should be given to deserving soldiers; and the troops should no longer
be recruited with exiles and criminals. The troops should be paid
more liberally and punctually; and one meal a day should be given to
the poor Spaniards, whether soldiers or not. The soldiers, moreover,
should be paid from the time of their arrival; for, as it is, they must
serve long without pay, which causes great suffering and immorality
among them. Half of the advance pay now given them in Mexico should be
held back until their arrival at Cavite. The desirability of aiding
needy Spaniards is again urged, and this charity should be placed in
charge of the Confraternity of La Misericordia. The seminary of Sancta
Potenciana is well conducted, and a most important work; it should
be further aided, and now needs that some order of professed nuns
be represented in it. Again the writer urges that the vessels plying
between the islands and Nueva España be commanded by inhabitants of
the Philippines, in order to correct the abuses now prevalent.

Upon the arrival of the ships from Nueva España, bringing the members
of the reestablished Audiencia, the royal seal, which represents
the authority and person of the king, is received by the governor
(June 8, 1598) with great solemnity and pomp, and deposited in the
royal building; the official record of this proceeding, with the
oaths taken by the new governor, is here presented.

The new archbishop of Manila writes to the king (June 24, 1598)
complaining of the neglected and impoverished condition of his see,
and the little interest or attention given to religion by the laity
therein. He denounces the governor as avaricious, corrupt, vicious,
and tyrannical. The archbishop asks that a new governor be appointed,
who shall have no selfish aims in accepting the post, preferably
an ecclesiastic. Some check must be placed on the immigration of
Chinese, who are ruining the country and demoralizing the natives. The
Inquisition should be reëstablished in Manila. In another letter (dated
July 26) Santibañez explains to the king his attitude in regard to
the marriage of one of his relatives, and complains that the governor
has, in consequence of this affair, slandered and persecuted him. The
archbishop again denounces Tello's vices, and asks that he himself
be permitted to return to Spain, as he cannot remain with Tello in
that land.

Fray Miguel de Benavides, bishop of Nueva Segovia, sends to the king
(June 30, 1598) a complaint against the conduct of the new governor,
Francisco Tello: the latter has contracted an unlawful marriage, and is
also very licentious; he has seized the property of a citizen; and he
is cowardly, extravagant and reckless, even wasting the public stores
for his own uses. Benavides asks that Luis Dasmariñas be appointed
governor in Tello's place. A postscript to this letter (dated July 5)
complains of the wrongs done to the Chinese by the Spanish officials,
and for details refers the king to Fray Diego de Soria, who is going
to Spain.

Tello sends the king a report on military matters (June 17, 1598). In
Mindanao, Ronquillo had been successful, but retired (pursuant
to orders afterward canceled), and is to be tried. In Cagayan the
revolt has been extinguished, and its leader killed; and the Spanish
encomendero whose oppression had had most to do with causing the
revolt has died in prison, while awaiting trial. Relations with
Japan are still uncertain, although Luis de Navarrete's reception
as ambassador had on the whole been favorable. Some new economies
are being practiced in the military establishment. An impregnable
citadel has been formed within the city, but there is a lack of
weapons; and there is great negligence in Nueva España in providing
serviceable and well-equipped soldiers. Another letter (dated June 19)
complains that the reënforcements sent from Nueva España are ragged,
penniless, and unarmed, largely on account of the rascality and greed
of their captains. The viceroy of that country illegally permits
Mexicans to bring money to the islands, to the great detriment of the
inhabitants. The old soldiers who have obtained encomiendas receive but
little income therefrom, because so many of the Indians are revolting;
these men need aid, which the king is asked to grant. The governor
claims that he is annoyed by defamatory libels, and asks that the
offenders be punished. He objects to the reckless marriages of rich
widows, and proposes to the king a plan for correcting this evil. The
royal treasury is greatly straitened, and for its relief Tello asks
permission to levy additional duties on the Chinese merchants. In
a third letter (July 9) Tello reports the number of religious in
the islands, belonging to the various orders, and the number still
needed. The Council of the Indias orders that suitable measures be
taken to increase the number of missionaries in the islands, and to
send out such as are fitted to do this work.

The Audiencia complains to Felipe II (July 15, 1598) of Tello for
various improprieties of conduct and irregularities of procedure;
but above all for failure to recognize that, by the establishment of
the Audiencia, the extent of his own jurisdiction is diminished.

A letter from Felipe III--who has succeeded his father on the
Spanish throne--to the archbishop of Manila (March, 1599) refers
to the latter certain complaints sent from Manila regarding some
Augustinian teaching friars.

Bishop Benavides writes (May 17, 1599) to the king, informing him of
the death of the new archbishop, and complaining of the acts of the
governor and Audiencia in sending a ship to trade with China--from
which all kinds of evils, spiritual and temporal, would result to
Macao and the Philippines.

Benavides writes to the king's secretary (May 22, 1599) urging that
a new governor be appointed for the islands; and he recommends for
that post several persons. He asks that no ships be allowed to go from
the Philippines to China, as that will ruin the Portuguese who trade
there. He complains of the undue power exercised by the bishops over
the religious orders; and that he receives so little salary that he
cannot live decently on it.

A brief statement of the religious houses established in Luzón up
to June 28, 1599, is made by Gerónimo de Alcaraz, secretary of the
cathedral chapter of Manila. A long report on military affairs was sent
(July 12, 1599) by Tello to the king. He urges that annual supplies of
men and arms be sent to the Philippines from Nueva España, adducing
many important reasons for this. The Spanish colony is surrounded by
many and powerful heathen countries, who are hostile to the Christian
faith. The insalubrious climate and various military expeditions are
continually causing losses of men. Artillery and skilled workmen are
greatly needed; and the fortifications need repair. The government of
Nueva España has given little attention to the needs of the Philippine
colony. Japanese pirates have menaced Luzón, and the Chinese are
suspected of plots against the Spaniards. Light sailing-vessels are
being built for defense of the coast, since galleys cannot be used
to advantage. Mindanao is pacified, but no tribute has yet been
paid, and the country is poor. A rebellion in Cagayan has been put
down, and the leaders executed; so that region is now pacified and
secure. Dasmariñas's expedition to Camboja has proved a failure,
and he is stranded on the Chinese coast, in great need; but Tello
is unable to send him aid, and advises him to return to Manila. Aid
for the poor soldiers is urgently needed and requested. This letter
is accompanied by a report of the conquest of Mindanao and of affairs
there, and other papers. Mindanao is a source of little profit; but it
is necessary to keep that island in subjection, in order to protect
the Pintados natives. Another paper gives a history of affairs in
Camboja, the relations of the Philippine colony with that country,
and the failure of Dasmariñas's expedition thither. At the end of
the document are depositions (dated in 1593, and apparently copied
from the official records of the colony) to show that the conquest
of Champa is justifiable, as its king is a pirate and tyrant, and a
man of evil life, and robs and kills Christians on the high seas.

In another letter of the same date (July 12) Tello makes a general
report of affairs in the islands. In matters of religion, there is
need for more ministers of the gospel. Two bishops have arrived in
the islands, and are in charge of their dioceses. The hospitals have
been aided; that for the Spaniards has been placed in charge of the
Confraternity of La Misericordia, and that for the natives is under
the king's authority. The seminary for girls (Santa Potenciana) is
in good condition, and doing excellent work. It should be under the
charge of professed nuns, and its income ought to be increased; the
king is asked to provide for these matters. The Jesuits have begun
the foundation of a seminary for the Indians, in which they are to
learn the Spanish language and civilized ways of living; the king
is asked to aid this also. Measures are being taken to enforce the
royal decree that formal submission and homage must now be rendered to
the king by the conquered Indians; but Tello finds some difficulties
in this. The bulls concerning the crusades are being preached, and
Tello expects to extend this to the Indians. One of the auditors has
died, and his place is filled. Tello has been obliged to check the
assumption of secular authority by the ecclesiastics. The Chinese
should be driven out of Manila, and the Parián abolished. A building
of stone has been erected for the Audiencia; Tello asks for a grant
of money to continue this work, and mentions other public buildings
which he has erected or improved. Religious instruction should be
commenced in the Ladrones Islands; and the viceroy of Nueva España
has been asked to send missionaries thither. The latter functionary
has neglected several matters which are necessary to the prosperity of
the Philippine colony, and has been arbitrary and overbearing in his
treatment of it. Especial complaint is made that he has evaded the
law which restricts the Chinese trade to citizens of the Philippine
colony, by granting licenses for trade to Peruvians, who have taken
from the islands the best of the Chinese trade, which is their main
support. A port at Canton has been opened to the Spaniards for trade;
and efforts are being made to improve this opportunity. Trade with
Siam has also begun. Tello asks that the citizens of Cebú be allowed
to trade occasionally with Peru; and that officers of vessels to Nueva
España be not appointed there, but in the islands. He recommends that
the Indians should be punished by moderate pecuniary-fines, rather than
by flogging. Various papers are appended to this letter by Tello. One
is a memorandum of the number of converts and missionaries in the
islands. Another is an inventory of the resources and income of the
hospital for natives, and a statement of its expenses for part of
the current year. The instructions given to the alcaldes-mayor and
to the religious for securing the formal submission of the Indians
to the authority of the Spanish king, and the measures taken for this
purpose in La Laguna, are given in detail.

The ordinances enacted by the Audiencia of Manila during the
year June, 1598, to July, 1599 (the part in this volume ends with
December, 1598) throw much light on social and economic conditions
at that time. Certain Chinese prisoners remain too long in jail for
non-payment of debts, thus causing much useless expense; their services
will hereafter be sold for the payment of their debts. Notaries must
be present at the inspection of prisons. Prisoners shall no longer
be permitted to leave the jail at their pleasure. All huckstering is
forbidden, under heavy penalties. No person whatever may leave the
islands without the governor's permission, under heavy penalties. The
prisons must be regularly visited by the auditors, so that justice
shall be promptly and duly administered. The Indians shall be
encouraged and obliged to raise poultry. Provision is made for the
aid of certain slaves in Pampanga. Another act makes regulations for
the supply of provisions in the city of Manila. Buffalo meat shall be
provided by contract with Indian hunters. The natives and Sangleys
shall be obliged to raise fowls and swine. The Indians must carry
their provisions to the city for sale; and for meat, fowls, and some
other articles the prices are fixed by the authorities. The natives
about Manila protest against being compelled to furnish supplies to
the city; and the Audiencia therefore enacts that this responsibility
shall be divided among the various districts, each being assigned
a period of two or three months therefor. Residencias of regidors
shall be taken every two months. Various reports are to be sent to
the king and his Council.

The remainder of the ordinances contained in this document will be
presented in _Vol_. XI.

_The Editors_
December, 1903.





Documents of 1597



    Letter to Felipe II. Antonio de Morga; June 30.
    Administration of the hospital at Manila. L.P. Dasmariñas; July 20.
    Letters to Felipe II. Francisco Tello; April 29-August 12.



_Source_: All these documents are obtained from original MSS. in the
Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla.

_Translations_: The first two documents are translated by Henry
B. Lathrop, of the University of Wisconsin; the third, by Arthur
B. Myrick, of Harvard University, except the second letter, which is
by Consuelo A. Davidson.




Letter from Antonio de Morga to Felipe II


Sire:

At the end of April of the current year I sent your Majesty an account
of the state of affairs in these islands, a duplicate whereof is
enclosed. I have only to add that some days after I returned to this
city, the ship "San Felipe" which left this city in July, 96, was
carried by several storms to the coast of Japan, entered the port
of Hurando, and was lost there; and the emperor of that country,
Taycosama, covetous of the treasure with which it was laden, took
it all. The men of the ship and the passengers have come in other
vessels. At the same time the said tyrant caused to be crucified
in Nangasaqui six barefoot friars of the Order of St. Francis,
of the number of those who were there from these islands [1]. He
has also crucified eighteen native Japanese Christians of their
following. Fuller accounts of the matter will be sent your Majesty
by the reports thereon to be written by the governor. So far as I can
learn, the said king of Japan is a proud and covetous barbarian, who
does not keep his word or observe the peace that he promises. As for
the Portuguese present in those islands, they desire to see us ousted
from there, and have done us no kindness in the affair of the said
ship. The religious had as little assistance in what was done to them;
and a little before had received great injuries from the religious of
the Society who were there and from their bishop, whose purpose was
to cause them to abandon that kingdom, as has been done--leaving the
members of the Society alone in this work of conversion, as they are,
much to their satisfaction. Yet the barefoot friars and their following
met death with great fervor for the faith and the defense thereof,
and God has since worked many marvels and miracles by means of their
bodies. Therefore we of this country have reason to be consoled and
happy to have produced in it such fruit for heaven and such honor
for Christianity. The loss of this ship was a very great one. She
was worth a million and a half--a mighty loss for so small a country;
hence it is more needy than ever and more wretched, and your Majesty
will have pity on it.

Herewith I send your Majesty again the despatches which it has been
possible to copy, in the short time allowed, from those sent last
year in the "San Phelipe." They dealt with the residencias and other
local affairs which it seemed essential for your Majesty to know,
because of their importance. I do not lack those who are ill-disposed
toward me because I pay attention as I ought to your Majesty's service;
but I care not, for truth must prevail. In the coming year there will
be sent at the first opportunity other official documents pertaining
to the same residencia in which I have been pleading, and which has
been undertaken for these islands.

It is said that your Majesty intends to command the reestablishment of
the royal Audiencia which used to be in these islands, which, according
to the disposition of affairs in it, will be the most necessary of
all things. I accordingly repeat my assurances to your Majesty that
on my conscience there never was so great a necessity thereof as
now; and I declare that it will be well received by all. I am here
very ready to serve your Majesty in all things in which my personal
service is required; for I have come hither five thousand leguas;
but if my departure hence is desirable, and if your Majesty is pleased
to command it, I shall regard it as a very great kindness. Above all
may your Majesty's royal will be fulfilled. May your royal person be
preserved for many years, as the whole of Christendom, and as we your
servants, have need. Manila, June 30, 1597.

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_

[_In the margin_: "Let everything referring to the miracles be
collected, and a summary thereof be made in the most authentic
manner."]




Administration of the Royal Hospital at Manila


Sire:

I have desired that the royal hospital of this city should be served
and administered with more charity, better order and a more perfect
system than hitherto; for I am told and I know how much the poor
thereof suffer, and of how much importance for the correction of
this and of many other evils is their good comfort, assistance, and
healing, spiritual and temporal--all which the hospital has in charge;
and how essential it is that it should be administered by persons
who are servants of God, self-denying and free from self-interest,
charitable and zealous for His service and for the good of their
neighbors. Hence I desire that the Order of St. Francis, because it
seems to me suitable on account of its self-denial, barefootedness,
and freedom from self-interest, may unite with the Confraternity of
La Misericordia [2] in the charge of the hospital. I suggest that
they place there four friars--two priests and two laymen; for this
can be done without interfering with the conversion of the natives,
and will be a thing of great service to God and your Majesty, the
good of the poor and of this state, and the good order, service,
and system of the said hospital. It will also remedy many of the
inconveniences that may arise, and of the deficiencies from which
the hospital suffers, from the want of such persons in charge of
it. For these reasons I have asked that this order, associated with
the Confraternity of La Misericordia, may attend to this matter,
and may take under its care the government and administration of the
hospital. Therefore I have set forth and enclosed separately some of
the reasons for this, and the advantages which I see in this course
and in joining the hospital for the slaves, which the Confraternity
of La Misericordia has founded, with the royal hospital. The plan
involves establishing separate quarters in the said royal hospital,
that there may be a definite place for the slaves, and that slaves
and Spaniards may not be mingled. In these quarters there may be a
separate ward or room for needy Spanish women, mestizas, and the like,
in such a way that they may be kept in separation and distinct from
the slaves. There is a great need of this ward for women, for there
is no place to put them in the royal hospital, and hence they are not
received there. By joining the royal hospital with the hospital of
the Confraternity of La Misericordia a place may be provided--which
will be of great importance, help, and benefit to the necessities of
poor and needy women who have not wherewithal to care for themselves
in their sicknesses. It must be no little that they suffer in these
regions for lack thereof, and because of their poverty; for even in
health there is no little to be undergone, and many are the evils
and misfortunes which may result from the lack of this provision.

The provincial and Order of St. Francis having discussed and considered
this matter hesitate about it because the distance between the hospital
and their monastery makes it inconvenient to keep religious in the
former; but as for me, my judgment is that, as they have religious
who have to go even further away in the work of instruction, they can
keep them here; and that there is no lack of religious who know the
language, for the work of conversion. Hence, although there will be
some inconveniences, they will not be serious and important; and it
seems best to overlook them, and to take account of the advantages
hoped for from this work and to be expected of it, which are not few,
or of small value and importance.

The deputies and Confraternity of La Misericordia were inclined to
accept the suggestion, and to undertake the administration of the
royal hospital jointly with that of the slaves' hospital; and the
same guardian of the Order of St. Francis, before the adoption of
the resolution above mentioned, approved it. In conference with the
deputies with regard to the effect of it, he hesitated on one or
two points. One of special importance was the question whether the
expense was to be in common, and whether the expense for the slaves
was to be paid out of the income of the hospital, and that for the
Spaniards, in consequence, out of the alms of the Confraternity
of La Misericordia. Although he made some doubt and scruple to me
personally as to paying for the slaves, to whom his superiors owed
the duty of support (although God knows how it was incurred) out of
the funds destined for the poor Spaniards, yet on the whole he said,
with my approval, that in the interim before your Majesty should be
advised of the whole matter, everything should be paid for by accounts
kept separately for the royal hospital and by consequence for that
of the slaves likewise--as used to be done and as is done still;
so that they are not connected, though the connection is desired
because of the known advantages of it. But the greatest obstacle to
the execution of this plan is the fear and mistrust put forward to
requiring the Confraternity and deputies of La Misericordia to render
accounts, exposing them to disturbance, and perhaps to expense and
loss for matters their connection with which is voluntary--being
assumed for charity and the service of God, and not for duty, pay,
or advantage. This objection, however, was met by the consideration
that the expense with its account had to pass before so many persons of
honor, standing, and financial stability that there was not much ground
for hesitation; since just as one superintendent or administrator
paid and gave accounts, so the deputies can do the same as well or
better, being more in number, and of no less financial standing,
and making their expenditures with the system and general agreement
which are to be desired. With all, I could not bring them to make the
venture. But if this risk and obligation were absent, they would do
it; this I know from some who were desirous of undertaking this work.

I give your Majesty an account of this matter, because of the
importance that it may have for the service of God and your Majesty,
the good of the poor, and the advantage of a work of such public
necessity and importance in these regions. If your Majesty should
be pleased to command that the Confraternity of La Misericordia
should take charge of the administration of the royal hospital,
as aforesaid, it will be necessary to come to a statement of the
system to be observed in making payments for the royal hospital and
that of the Confraternity of La Misericordia, by deciding whether
they are to be kept separate or no. It will also be necessary, in
the way in which your Majesty shall be most pleased and profited, to
deal with the mistrust about the accounts, which is what causes most
hesitation. Submitting myself to your royal pleasure, and suggesting as
I ought what occurs to me in the matter, I propose, Sire, that payments
be made only as passing through the hands of a single administrator
and superintendent. In this way he will be able to give account of
the expenditure. Let the manner, order, and direction of the same be
in accordance with the judgment of the deputies of La Misericordia;
and let the superintendent give his account of expenditures made under
the direction of the deputies. On such conditions the Confraternity
will take charge of the work; for it will not hand in accounts
and will be called upon for no business except of charity, trust,
and good administration, while the superintendent will hand in the
accounts for the said Confraternity. Thus the whole, if your Majesty
please, will be in one; and on other conditions the Confraternity will
not undertake it. At least I regard it as a matter of the highest
importance and advantage that your Majesty give commands that the
archbishop and the Order of St. Francis place four religious--two
priests and two laymen--in the said hospital; and that, in case
this order cannot undertake it, the Society of Jesus do so, for,
being persons of great charity and good government in all things,
it will be of great advantage for them to have this in their charge;
so that in this way it seems that many great evils would be remedied,
and many great advantages result. Our Lord keep your Majesty many
long years, as His Divine Majesty has power, and as we all desire
and have need. Manila, July 20, 1597.

_Luis Perez Dasmariñas_

[_Endorsed:_ "Let the president and auditors and the archbishop state
what they think best to be done in the case; and in the meantime
let them give such orders as they think best for the good conduct of
the hospital."]

Considering and reflecting that the royal hospital of this city is
one of the most important and considerable establishments in this
country and these islands, it is very essential to the same, for the
best advantage and comfort of the poor, and for the good order and
system of the administration of the hospital, that it should be under
the charge of persons who are influenced by the love of God and by
zeal for His service and for the welfare and advantage of His poor,
and by no payment or temporal interest. Since all the other hospitals
of this city have this advantage, it is a pity that it should be
lacking in this one alone, which is of so much importance; and that
although it has so good an income and other advantages, it should not
surpass the others; and that there should be cause that many refuse to
go to it to be cared for, and prefer to go elsewhere. That is proof
of either carelessness and disorder, or of necessity; and, although
there is some of the latter, yet I believe that it must be mainly the
former. Likewise it spends and requires on its part certain salaries
and expenses for persons who serve in the said hospital. Great injury
is done to the service of God our Lord and of his Majesty the king,
if such an institution is managed extravagantly, ineffectively, or
unsystematically. At the same time other hospitals are well managed,
because of being in the hands of persons who are members of religious
orders and servants of our Lord; who being free and bare from personal
interest, exert themselves for the good of the poor, merely for His
love and service, and with charity and zeal for the good of their
neighbors. This is what is done in the hospital for the natives and
in that for the Sangleys, which are now well established, having
their incomes and accounts separate. On this account, and because
they are in charge of persons who are servants of God and have the
qualities aforesaid, they are better served than when they were
otherwise managed, and better than is that for the Spaniards, for
lack of persons to administer and serve it through love and charity
toward God and their neighbor, as has been said.

Hence, considering this, and because I know that it will be of
great convenience and advantage to the service of God our Lord,
and of his royal Majesty; the good, profit, and relief of many poor,
and of the wretched and needy; and the common benefit, welfare, and
service of this state--therefore I am of the opinion and belief that
it may be very advantageous and extremely useful, and may conduce
to the improvement, good management, and systematic conduct of
the royal hospital that the hospital of the Confraternity of La
Misericordia should be joined with it. The resulting advantages
will be recapitulated; and the causes and reasons on which I rely,
and which I find for this, are the following.

The first reason is that this is a work of so great service to the
Divine Majesty of God, and the royal Majesty; to the state a very
great advantage, profit, and benefit; to the poor, the advantage,
attendance, and healing of their maladies and miseries, bodily as
well as spiritual.

Conspicuous among the advantages is the service to God done by caring
for His poor, whether Spanish or not, which latter are a forgotten
and wretched people--although some of their masters, for charity and
the love and service of God, provide and afford them their support,
their good, their care, and their salvation, spiritual and temporal.

The royal Majesty will be much advantaged, because by the charity,
good order, and system that will exist, several salaries for persons
employed in the said hospital may be dispensed with, and there will
be more profit and increase of the revenue; while for the support of
the poor there will be a larger fund, in addition to the fact that
they will be better cared for and served. The result will be that
health will more abound, and that perhaps mortality will be lessened,
together with these great sicknesses--a great service to God and
his royal Majesty, and the state; for his Majesty will have more
soldiers, by which he will reap a profit, and in this case a great one,
because of the great cost and expense of sending and bringing them
here. The state will also have a larger population, more citizens
and men to defend it, in addition to the great private and ordinary
benefit received by the people thereof, in saving much expense on
their property incurred for the care of their servants and slaves,
as well as trouble, care, and responsibility, by their being cared
for in the said hospital bodily and spiritually.

Then the importance of this for the souls and bodies, not only
of the Spaniards but those of the slaves, may easily be seen and
understood. For the former, the Spaniards, fail not to have and
to suffer great and special need in their illnesses and deaths,
of someone to minister to them, or at the least to aid and comfort
them therein; while the latter, the slaves, as a people cast off and
the greater part of them ordinarily belonging to the royal crown,
and of so different races--some or many of them yet to be converted,
or imperfectly instructed and entered in the Christian faith--still
more require that there should be someone who in the love of God,
and with zeal for the good of their souls, should aid them and secure
their welfare and health, spiritual and temporal, in the one case as
in the other.

Further, the reward, merit, and crown befitting the service done
to God our Lord by this, and to the royal Majesty, and the good
to this state and these islands, will not be small; since the
result and the advantages which will arise from it are so great
and so special, important, and universal; and this is a cause for
applying the compassion and Christian charity in this state to the
glory and service of God, to the welfare, relief, and consolation,
perhaps the salvation, of His creatures and the poor thereof; and
to the edification and confusion of the great numbers of barbarians,
heathens, and infidels whom we have as witnesses about us looking at
us, and who will see nothing that can move and edify them like such
works of true charity, performed without worldly payment and profit.

It will also result from this that the Confraternity of La
Misericordia, which is of such importance, and which succors,
aids, and relieves so many general and public necessities, would
ordinarily be supported in this state and would be more continuous,
and that charity and compassion would be more exercised, as has been
said. The hospital would be more frequented and more fully occupied,
and the poor better provided and served; and all this would result
because of the good order, careful accounting, and system which would
exist, on account of putting the control in the hands of persons of
such security, gravity, and commendable zeal as the deputies of the
said Confraternity. This will also be a cause that for the love and
service of God our Lord, as also for their own characters and persons,
and their own interest in their own property (namely, their slaves),
more people will visit the hospital, and aid it with greater care and
liberality, and less hesitation; for one month brings the chance upon
one, another upon another, and in this order it comes to all. This
will be occasion and cause that the devout women, and those of the
greatest influence, after seeing the work and perceiving that it is
under the care of religious who are servants of God, and under that
of their husbands, and that it is for the good of their slaves, will
please and desire to see them, and to visit the hospital, and take
the poor some dainties; and from the visits made to some of them will
result the good, the comfort, and the consolation of the rest.

Further, as for the order, good accounting, and systematic management
of the expenditure, and the care of the estate of the said hospital,
it can be carried on by no hand with more clearness and security than
by persons of so great honor and so high standing, persons who are
required to be such, and who are themselves cognizant of and acquainted
with all that is done. Thus the defects, if any there are, will be
more known and observed; and if they arise from need the hospital will
finally have more, and those from among the best in the state, who
will be active in their efforts to supply and provide what is lacking.

The service of the hospital, which is of so great importance to the
health and comfort of the sick, will be better and more punctual,
and not so expensive, being attended to by persons undertaking it
for charity, and not for gain.

Besides all that is said and referred to above, there will be avoided
in the aforesaid way many sinful speeches and murmurs, inasmuch as
the business will be in the hands of persons of such charity, poverty,
holy zeal, and high standing; and thus with reason there will be more
occasion for glory and praise to God for this work than for murmurs
and condemnation.

In short, this undertaking may afford to the Divine Majesty of God
our Lord, service and glory; to the royal Majesty, great service and
profit; to the state, great and general good, and advantages; to these
nations and tribes who are looking on at us, confusion and edification;
to the poor, service, aid, and comfort in their wretchednesses and
sicknesses, and care and healing for their bodies, and above all
for their souls; and to those who have in their charge the service,
administration, and superintendence, a great crown and reward.

Therefore, since this project is good for all and in all, and since
this work encloses within itself so many great and important effects,
it is right that it should be favored, and that your piety should
be supported in it. For the religious who will be occupied there,
will be well occupied and employed, preaching with their works true
charity and humility, and at the same time striving and aiding in
the saving and healing of the souls, both of Spaniards and of others,
who shall be ministered to and cared for there; and, since so great
advantages may result from this, it is right that it should be done,
and that your piety should be supported in encouraging and beginning
a work of such importance, and from which so great advantages are
hoped for and may result, as has been said.

And assuredly it is highly desirable that the royal hospital should be
in the care of this order or of the Society, that it may be served and
administered as is proper, and that it may enjoy the advantages which
the other hospitals enjoy, and the good administration which they have,
as well that for the natives as that for the Sangleys, as has been
said. It is also a great good, glory, and service to our Lord, and a
cause of great satisfaction and consolation that the results obtained
from them are great; and there will be great enthusiasm from this
day forward because they are in charge of persons who are servants of
God, free from personal interests, who for God, His love and service,
give their efforts to this work. Of this advantage it is right that
this royal hospital should have the fruit, because it is not the
least important, and that it should not suffer, and remain as it is.

_Luis Perez Dasmariñas_



Letters from Francisco Tello to Felipe II


Sire:

Last year, as soon as I arrived in these islands, I wrote to your
Majesty what had taken place, taking into account the short time that I
had spent here. I was afterward told that the people of Terrenate were
coming to these your Majesty's islands to inflict injuries upon your
subjects and vassals, and that the natives of Mindanao were helping
them in this. The conquest of Mindanao being in charge of the heirs
of the late Esteban Rrodriguez de Figueroa, who was killed there,
I insisted on their continuing that pacification, giving them men at
your cost, and appointing, as general and leader, Don Juan Ronquillo,
supplying them with what they needed from your Majesty's storehouses,
the supply being ample. All was charged to the estate of Esteban
Rrodriguez and is now being collected.

I sent to Mindanao Captain Toribio de Miranda, so that, until
the arrival of the troops, he might encourage and look after the
Spaniards, who had fortified themselves there after the death of
Esteban Rrodriguez. Captain Toribio de Miranda, setting out with
this order of mine, met the soldiery who had deserted that position,
on account of the coming of Captain Juan de Lajara. The latter I
hold under arrest. He is to be tried for having abandoned his post
without orders from the governor of these islands. Toribio de Miranda
having met these men, showed them my orders which he was carrying,
and made them return. Then of the men whom I had sent from here, some
arrived with Captain Diego de Chabez, with assistance in the shape
of supplies. Encouraged by this, many returned to Mindanao with the
others and fortified themselves again, although in a better position
than before. After this, General Don Juan Ronquillo left Oton with
the rest of his force, which numbered perhaps one hundred and fifty
men in all. At the present moment I am quite satisfied that, after
his arrival, a large part of that land will be peacefully opened
up. I have no good reports from that land in regard to abundance of
provisions or gold (which is the only thing to encourage those who
make these conquests), nor as large a tribute as there was said to
be. In the prosecution of this business the necessary demands of your
Majesty's service will be considered.

When I came to the government I found that the Sangleys had been
given a free hand, and jurisdiction in the administration and
cabildo. Considering the troubles that might result, and the large
numbers of Sangleys here (somewhat over ten thousand), I took away
and withdrew their power in the administration--leaving, however, a
governor among them, as was formerly the custom. I have expelled from
this land a large number of the Sangleys who were here, and I shall
soon order many others to go, leaving only three or four thousand men,
who are necessary for the service of the land.

About two months ago the Parian of the Sangleys was burned, together
with a large amount of property. I assisted that night in taking care
of the property of a few, which was saved. The fire did not touch this
city, although the Parian is contiguous to it. All this was well done,
and I permitted them to rebuild their Parian, but one hundred paces
farther from the city than it was before.

We are having a good deal of trouble from the license taken by some
religious in this land. They have a practice of excommunicating the
governor by virtue of the apostolic briefs in their possession. Having
no authority here to annul their unlawful acts, we can have no liberty
to carry on your Majesty's service as it should be done. Therefore I
humbly beg your Majesty to consider and order what is most necessary
for your Majesty's service.

Many events have taken place in these days. One of them was the rising
of the Zambales natives, and the murder of two alcaldes-mayor--one a
short time before I came, and the other after my arrival. Therefore I
appointed Captain Julian de Cuenca alcalde-mayor of Panpanga, to go
to punish them--which is a difficult matter, because these Zambales
are in hiding in rugged mountain ranges. However, he wrote me that he
had beheaded twenty of them, and that he continues to hunt them down;
so that after such a punishment they will be sufficiently frightened
for him to make the effort to induce them to leave the sierra for a
settlement where they may be instructed.

Although I commenced to govern with mildness, because it seemed
to me the best way to get along with the Spaniards here, yet when
I came to know them and see the license that they take, I found it
necessary to punish several captains and regidors. On New Year's day,
I had the entire city council arrested for an act of disobedience to
me, which occurred during the election of alcaldes. In all that has
been done I have followed judicial forms and taken records, so that,
whenever it is necessary, your Majesty may order their examination.

When I arrived, I found your Majesty's royal affairs in confusion,
owing to the carelessness and neglect of former governors. I have
ordered that, in building, stone shall be substituted for wood which
has hitherto been used. Fines and the expenses of justice will be
attended to. I also ordered the construction of cabildo buildings
in stone, where there had been none before. The whole city has been
enriched by stone buildings, and since my arrival more than one
hundred and fifty houses have been erected. I am trying to have water
conducted into the city, as it is needed by the citizens and by the
troops stationed here by your Majesty. Many have died on account of
the poor water.

Don Luys Dasmariñas, when he was governor here, appointed Captain Juan
Xuarez Gallinato sargento-mayor of the force to go to the assistance
of the king of Canboja, who they said was besieged by his enemy the
king of Çian. When they arrived there they met a rough reception
from a part of the people of Canboja, and from some Sangleys who are
settled there and engage in trade. The Spanish came to blows with some
of these Sangleys and killed some of them. There was lost, according
to their story, a large amount of property belonging to the Sangleys,
which they had placed aboard sampans at the time of the fight. I am
examining the papers which Captain Juan Xuarez Gallinato brought. He
has already returned from his expedition, and justice will be meted
out in the case. May our Lord preserve your Majesty for many years
for the need of Christendom, etc. Manila, April twenty-nine, 1597.

_Don Francisco Tello_

Sire:

From the vessel "San Phelipe," lost in the sea of Japan, some letters
addressed to your Majesty reached my hands, which I enclose herewith.

I have imprisoned Don Luis Perez Dasmariñas, because he failed to fit
out and repair thoroughly the said vessel; and, for the same reasons,
I have imprisoned also General Matias Delandecho. An investigation of
this matter is being made in the case of each, and justice shall be
done. Copies of all proceedings in connection with this investigation
will be sent to your Majesty.

I beg to thank your Majesty for your kindness to this kingdom and
especially to myself, in creating here a royal Audiencia, a tribunal
very much needed by this government; and although so far I have not
received from your Majesty any letter or decree to that effect, I
have heard the news through the auditor Don Antonio Maldonado and
others, who have communicated it to me. Doctor Antonio de Morga,
lieutenant-general of this kingdom, serves your Majesty here with
zeal and assiduity; and because he enforces the law, he has made
enemies--since, as I have previously written to your Majesty, there
are honest people here willing to serve your Majesty; but there
exist others unruly and ill disposed, who are exceedingly dangerous
to the country. I am punishing a few of these, and am investigating
the previous records of others; it shall be done throughout. May
our Lord preserve your Majesty as is needful for the good of
Christendom. Manila, June 15, 1597.

_Don Francisco Tello_


Sire:

Every day events are taking place of which I shall advise your
Majesty. A grave Dominican friar [3] lately arrived here from Japon,
who went on the ship "San Felipe" which was lost there. He acquainted
me with the affairs of that kingdom, and gave me a memorandum which
will accompany this. I asked him to sign it, and I now send it to
your Majesty, so that you may order to be considered and decreed in
this matter whatever you think best for your Majesty's royal service.

Later advices have arrived from Japon to the effect that the Japanese
are considering the occupation of the island of Hermosa [Formosa]
which lies near these islands, and serves as a connecting point between
China and these islands. I am considering what is best to do in this
case, because, although I am of the opinion that we should seize it
first, the council of war opposed me; urging that we have few men
for such an enterprise. I have appointed, as general of the coast,
Captain Don Juan Çamudio, a trusty and serviceable person. I am also
fitting out ships with which to navigate among all these islands,
wherever it is necessary.

I have sent money and men to Cagayan to fortify your Majesty's fort
there. If the men and assistance which I have asked from Nueva Spaña
are sent to me, I shall not fear all the power of Japon; because,
although there are few troops here, they are all excellent and
well-drilled. Your Majesty may be certain that your vassals here
will maintain what we hold, even to the death, with sword in hand,
doing our duty in your Majesty's service. May our Lord preserve your
royal person, as Christendom has need and your vassals desire. Manila,
June 19, 1597.

_Don Francisco Tello_

As matters of importance arise in this government, it becomes necessary
to give your Majesty an account of such affairs. Yesterday we held
a council of war to consider a petition presented to us by Don Luys
Perez Dasmariñas, relative to an expedition to the island of Hermosa,
and we passed resolutions which your Majesty may examine, if you
be pleased to do so, by means of the report which will accompany
this. Although I ordered with resolution what was to be done, I shall
keep the sounding-lead in my hand until reënforcements and money
arrive from Mexico; for without men nothing can be done. I have sent
to the viceroy for five hundred men.

While the detachment of thirty soldiers under an ensign, ordered
to the assistance of Mindanao, was on its way thither, aboard a
Sangley ship, the Sangleys (who numbered more than forty) mutinied,
and killed twenty-five soldiers and some women, and the rest jumped
overboard. Captain Gregorio de Bargas, who was sailing in that region
with my orders, upon hearing of the matter, attacked and captured the
ship, and killed forty soldiers. Nine who were left alive were brought
to me two days ago. Today they were executed, with great publicity,
before the eyes of their nation and others who are in this city.

Yesterday there arrived from Malaca some of the soldiers who were
with Sargento-mayor Gallinato on the expedition to Canboja. They say
that they had the news there that Malucos and Terrenatans had banded
together, captured your Majesty's fort and annihilated the Portuguese
detachment stationed there. I am making an investigation to see what
foundation this report has. The result I shall try to send on these
ships. These soldiers also say that they were told that there were four
English ships off Maluco; and that it was thought that they had joined
Terrenate and Maluco to undertake this enterprise. I am guarding the
frontiers, because as there are few men here and the fort is in Manila,
they were in need of reënforcements. In everything I shall continue
to do all that is necessary for your Majesty's royal service, and I
shall inform you of everything that happens, after the departure of
these vessels, by the despatch-boat, which will be in readiness to
be sent out if necessary.

They say that the news from Mindanao is quite plainly for your
Majesty's advantage. Although I have heard nothing by letter from the
governor there, several Indians who have come from there one by one
corroborate this news. May our Lord preserve your Majesty's Catholic
person to the benefit of Christendom. Manila, June 22, 1597.

_Don Francisco Tello_

Sire:

This ship of discovery under Joan Batista Justiniano, which is about to
go to Nueva Spaña, has just returned, on account of lack of cables, and
will sail again in the morning. Some further details concerning what
I have already written to your Majesty are as follows. We have just
heard from Mindanao that the war has been renewed with the Indians,
because they have failed to observe the stipulations of the treaty. So
we have again sent assistance in men, munitions, supplies, and other
things. I have ordered General Don Joan Ronquillo to prosecute the war,
and, after having demolished the enemy's fort, to build a good one
in its place, leaving it well supplied with artillery, and fortified;
and to leave a captain with one hundred arquebusiers, and mobilize the
remainder of the troops, amounting to about two hundred men. If the
Japanese should come, as is thought probable, he will take position
on one of the frontiers, especially that of Cagayan. In other places,
I have appointed, as justices, captains who were old soldiers, and I
have given them soldiery. What little sail-cloth is to be had here,
is all well prepared for any occasion. I am having artillery cast,
and powder and other necessary things provided, in all haste. Although
I am almost out of lead and iron, I shall try to have one of your
Majesty's small vessels, which now lie here, go to China, where there
is a great abundance of such things, in order to buy some, and return
so quickly that we shall not be embarrassed by the scarcity.

I am having some galliots and light vessels built to patrol all these
coasts, because their defense is quite important if we are attacked
by the Japanese.

When I became governor of these islands, I found them full of
Sangleys. I have expelled more than eight thousand of them, and I am
gathering the others, who are scattered, into Manila, in order that
those who are not needed may return to their own country, for they
teach the natives very evil customs. In everything I shall always
try to further the service of God and your Majesty, as I was ordered
to do, and is my duty. May our Lord preserve your Majesty's Catholic
person as is needful. Manila, August twelve, 1597.

_Don Francisco Tello_



Documents of 1598



    Letter to Antonio de Morga. Juan de Ronquillo; January 4.
    Report of conditions in the Philippines. Antonio de Morga; June 8.
    Recommendations as to reforms needed in the islands. [Unsigned
    and undated; 1598?]
    Reception of the royal seal at Manila. Francisco Tello, and others;
    June 8.
    Letters from the archbishop of Manila to Felipe II. Ygnacio de
    Santibañez; June 24 and 26.
    Letters from the bishop of Nueva Segovia to Felipe II. Miguel de
    Benavides; June 30 and July 5.
    Letters to Felipe II. Francisco Tello; June 17-July 9.
    Report of the Audiencia on the conduct of Tello. Antonio de Morga,
    and others; July 15.



_Source_: All these documents are obtained from original MSS. in the
Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla.

_Translations_: The first, fourth, fifth, and most of the sixth,
are translated by Robert W. Haight; the second, by Rachel King; the
third, and part of the sixth and seventh, by James A. Robertson;
most of the seventh, by José M. and Clara M. Asensio; the eighth,
by Helen E. Thomas.




Letter from Juan Ronquillo to Antonio de Morga


In my last letter, which I sent you by Captain Luys de Villafaña,
who left this island on the first of August, I described the need
that we were in, and the investigations on account of the failure
of the arms to arrive. Although he was wrecked on the way, I have
understood that the papers reached there, having been wet, but in
such shape as to be legible. Thus far I have seen no answer, either
to this despatch, or to those sent on the thirteenth of May and the
first of July, from the lord governor, or from your Grace. It leaves
me quite undecided and uncertain as to what I am to do. While the
aid awaited was being sent on, our need was becoming more pressing,
to such an extent that I even abandoned the work, dropped the
pacification, and ran the whole fleet aground, so that all the men
could busy themselves with gathering landan for food. It seemed to
me more important not to abandon the foothold that we had gained in
the country, than to get more land, and risk losing it all. Further,
it was impossible to provide the men from so few rations; and with so
small provision and less support, and large appetites, it looked to me
as if they would be forced to leave. I finally resolved to tell them
not to be impatient to turn their prows about, or to hope for Manila;
for here we should live or die. Thereupon I embarked the next day and
went up the river to cut landan; [4] for I felt myself fortunate if
I could get plenty of this even. We passed several days in this way,
and when it appeared to me that the men were settled, and less anxious
about the proposed movement, I had a few vessels launched; and in
them I sent two captains with fifty men to the villages of Lumaguan,
who is the most friendly to us, that they might be fed there, and
together with the natives reconnoiter some of the enemies' villages
in the neighborhood. When they were setting out against the latter
one night, they attacked the very friends who were guiding them,
and killed several. They had thought that they were being deceived,
and betrayed to the enemy. The mistake made much trouble, and it would
have been worse if they had not taken the utmost pains to remedy it,
giving satisfaction to the injured, making them presents, and giving
them whatever they had with them. As they were truly friendly to us,
this sufficed to put them on the former footing, as they have since
demonstrated in all earnestness. So I persevered in the undertaking,
changing, however, the leader whom I had sent; and it pleased God that
this expedition should be the beginning of so much good fortune as we
have had since then, for back from the fort of Buyahen, on a large
lagoon, were found a number of the hostile villages, with excellent
fields of rice, although it was not the season to harvest it. I ordered
them to take the stronghold of a chief named Dato Minduc, which was
close to Buyahen. Its site was such that the natives themselves say
that, unless men were to come down from heaven to take it, it would
be impossible to do so. We captured it with all the artillery in it,
a number of men being lost on their side, and none on ours. After this
the enemies began to lose spirit, and the friendly natives to take
heart, and to hold us in greater esteem. This was on the twenty-ninth
of August. On the very next day I brought the men down to the fort,
and encouraged them all, and bade them be of good hope that the work
would soon be done; and I cheered them to it, and straightway followed
up the undertaking, without giving the men's ardor a chance to cool. I
got aboard ship, and made my way along the coast. On the eighteenth of
September, I entered a river called Picon, in a well-peopled country,
there being, besides the natives, a large number of the enemy, who had
been scattered abroad, and had joined them. At daybreak we arrived at
the first village, close to the sea. It was one of the finest places
I have seen, with excellent houses, and a very elaborate mosque; there
was a good supply of swine, fowls, goats, and fruit. The enemy made a
stand, but at the first encounter we overpowered them, and killed or
captured more than two hundred persons; the troops stopped for food,
and then I had the village burned. I would have liked to attack another
village, which lay a day's march inland, and which has two thousand
houses. I left it, because I could have done nothing at that time;
for the fugitives from the first village had warned them, and they had
all gone to the mountains. This stroke had terrorized the whole coast,
and not a vessel appeared over its whole extent; for, as there were
Indians in many places, they had all received news of it without delay.

I could remain no longer, nor pass on to other encounters which I
might have had there, on account of the crops which I had discovered
at Buyahen, which were urgently demanding my presence for the harvest,
before their owners should gather them. Accordingly I came back to the
fort, whence, in less than four days, I again sent the same captains
who had been there before, for the crops, with eighty soldiers and
all the boats, besides five hundred friendly Indians, to gather
the harvest, and to take another fort in the same neighborhood,
of which the Indians informed them. On the twenty-second of October
they attacked it, and took it with all the artillery, killing more
than a hundred and seventy of them, besides taking a number captive. I
did not come out so cheaply as the last time; for it was an extremely
strong place, having, besides the usual defenses, inventions of which a
barbarous people are incapable. Furthermore, they had fastened on the
very curtains some large spars bent like a bow, so that when anyone
attacked it, by cutting one end loose from the inside a hundred men
would be thrown down--namely, all who were climbing upon the rampart
platform. It was intrenched at intervals in such wise that it was
necessary to win it step by step, and from below, if one undertook
to take it by storm. There were a great many pikemen to receive the
stormers, and they felt so safe that they put their women and goods
on the inside to guard them better. Thus they lost everything, and
the booty was very rich, although the Indians obtained the most--more
than did the soldiers, of whom eighteen came out wounded (including
the two captains, Guerrero and Grabiel Gonzalez), most being wounded
by bullets and arrows. They had fortified this fort strongly; and
since they had lost it first, having considered it so long as a last
hope for their safety, they thought of nothing more after losing it
but being left in peace in the one which they at present hold; for
already they have hardly a hand's breadth of land left, and there they
are fortifying themselves as much as possible. This will not succeed,
for without my going there they will come to ask peace from me--in a
few days I hope, because the grain is growing up all over. In this
way the whole country becomes ours and the crops are left ready to
be gathered. They lie so near to Buyahen that the sentinel bells can
be heard from one place to the other.

They are retreating and there is no one who can go ahead. They are
sending chiefs from a distance to conduct us peaceably, who wish
to become our friends and pay tribute. On the first of November I
arrived anew at the mouth of this river on the site of Mindanao,
where the fort which belonged to the Spaniards when they took the
country was burned. There was a fleet there of more than sixty ships
and we did not know what people they carried; but, believing that
it was those whom we were awaiting from those islands, I was glad
that they had arrived in so good time, and sent some of the friendly
Indians to reconnoiter them. They said that they were Terrenatans. I
immediately sent Captain Grabiel Gonzalez to make certain who it was,
and on the way he met a caracoa which was on sentinel duty. Some
arquebus-shots were exchanged, and without any injury he came back
with the information. There were at this time in the whole camp,
provisions for not more than nine days; and the munitions were so
far spent that, having no matches, the soldiers were going about with
fire-brands in their hands--for the few matches and balls which they
had, had been taken by the troops who were outside harvesting the
grain. We had to consider that as soon as we sent to call them back
we were lost; for if the rice were not cut we should have nothing to
live on. Likewise, on the other hand, I saw the great injury which I
should suffer if the enemy should fortify themselves where they were
working. It would cost me a great deal to dislodge them, and besides
there was the risk which was run of losing the communication with
your city; for we had to enter boldly into the enemy's country,
as one of the boats of the friendly Indians from Zanboanga had
done. Finally, as the evil of the want of food was most pressing,
and as without food we could neither go back nor forward, I resolved
to reënforce the pass of Vutil, so that the enemy could not pass that
way and join with the people of Buyahen. The troops who were acting as
porters kept the pass, and immediately, at the same time, I sent the
people who were above down to the sea, ordering Captain Juan Pacho,
who was at their head, not to come back without bringing in first all
the rice which he had harvested and cut, as aforesaid. I got a galley
ready with a good deal of trouble, for there was not even bonote [5]
to calk it, and I had to go in person among the houses of the Indians
to find some. I launched it, and fitted it with guns and new rigging
to make it ready; for I was resolved that if the enemy fled I should
follow them even as far as their own country. When the men got back
I embarked, on Thursday morning, which I reckon to be the third of
November. By noon I had come in sight of the enemy, where I anchored,
and we exchanged cannon-shots. Seeing that he had a larger force than
I had understood, I immediately sent an order to Captain Guerrero who
was in Butil, that he should come down to the river of Vitara to the
sea, with a galliot, and enter the mouth of this river of Mindanao
and come within sight of the enemy, and exchange cannon-shots on his
arrival. He did so, arriving at noon on Friday. On the way he met an
outpost of the enemy, and killed a few Indians who were with them,
with a cannon-shot. When he arrived at cannon-shot distance from the
fort he anchored, and commenced to fire. The enemy replied so well
that at the first shot they hit the galliot, and it was only by good
fortune that it did not go to the bottom. With the second they killed
a soldier. With such exercise the day was passed. Saturday morning,
Lumaguan having arrived with some troops that were expected, I ordered
Captain Guerrero to land immediately with twenty-five soldiers and join
me, leaving the rest and the captain of the galliot in it, with orders
that, when the troops began the investment, the galliot should come up
close to the mouth of a lake which was close to the fort. Accordingly,
when these troops came I landed ninety men with Captains Juan Pacho,
Guerrero, Ruy Gomes, Grabiel Gonzalez, and Altra. I circled about
the fort with the galley, fighting with a good deal of skirmishing,
and the galliot doing the same on the other side, so that we had the
fort between us. On my side the troops landed not a hundred paces from
the fort, on which, on the side toward the aforesaid lake, they had
already closed in, and which they had reached as well as on our side,
where a very large cavalier was under construction, although they had
not yet finished the enclosure. The enemy were so brave that although,
by keeping their fleet within the lake, they might have gone away
two nights before without losing anything, not only would they not
do so, but they even ran the whole fleet on land, excepting one ship,
using that as a bridge to pass from the cavalier to the fort.

That very night they cried out to us, telling Captain Don Juan
Pacho to have a care and not come to fight them, "because we are all
Terrenatans, and you are Castilians and Tanpacans." Although they
might have been safe in their fort, and not have lost it unless they
sold themselves very dearly, most of them went out into the open
country to reconnoiter and there commenced to fight with the land
troops. These acted so courageously and so quickly that the enemy
had no time to prepare before they had come upon them in front; and
when they wished to go back to the fort they could not do so at all,
for the artillery of my galley, which was moored quite near, cut
off their road with _lenternas_ [grenades?] and balls. Our men kept
coming forward without giving way in any part, gained the cavalier,
and by the bridge that the enemy had provided passed on to the
fort, and won it with all the artillery, altogether in less than an
hour. They took the whole fleet, of which we were in much need, and
ten pieces of fairly good artillery and more than fifty arquebuses,
although most of these were thrown away by the friendly Indians. There
were killed there on this occasion more than eighty Moros, among
them the commander of their forces, who was an uncle of the king of
Terrenate, and was named Cachil Baba, together with other cachils [6]
and chiefs. Of those who fled many were wounded, most of whom died,
as was afterward seen, in the marshes and mountains. One band of more
than fifty Moros--some being wounded, among these a cachil--made an
attempt to pass to the other side of the river, thinking that from
there they might escape; but, as the river is broad and the current
swift, they were all drowned. Every day we are finding more and more
who have died from wounds and hunger, and those who have survived are
gathering in small bands and going back to their country. They found
some boats to take their goods across at the cape of San Agustin,
and carry this good news to their king--whom perchance the gain
will dispose to continue. This reënforcement was brought by Buysan,
brother of Sali and uncle of Raxa Mura, who went to get him and wished
him to attack the sargento-mayor, at the time when they cut off his
leg. The king of Terrenate yielded to him respectfully, as your Grace
may see by the letter of the chief captain of Maluco, a copy of which
is sent with this, in which he informs me of what had happened. The
troops who came were the most noble and gallant in all Terrenate, and
the commander was an old man of more than sixty years, white-haired,
with mustaches more than a span long. He was a very venerable person,
and so valiant that, after being brought down with an arquebus-shot,
so that he could not move, he raised his campilan in the air, calling
out to his troops to fight until death. They came well supplied with
women and goods, and the materials for making powder. They brought
gilded field-beds to sleep on, with cushions of silk and chairs to
sit upon, and richly worked cloths for their use. There was so much
with this and other things that the booty must have been worth six
thousand ducats; and though, as always, the soldiers took the lesser
part, yet even thus some of them are a little better off.

I am well aware that I was very fortunate on that occasion, and if
our Lord was pleased to grant me success, still fortune will change
and the enemy will have it. Not only will that which remains to me
here be lost, but even the Pintados Islands have been in great danger,
having run the risk each year of being harried by these enemies. But
though I knew that God was helping us in a time of such need, yet I
had almost lost hope of success. On the other hand, finding myself
puzzled and almost desperate at seeing that at the end of six months
there had come no reply from the lord governor, nor in any way any
intimation of his will or determination, and that it almost seemed
as if he were forgetting us, as if we were a lost people without
hope, I resolved to do what I did as one who was destitute of aid,
and who must live by his own hands. The success was such that I may
be pardoned. When I took the site of Buyaen I was so nearly out of
supplies that there was not a cannon-ball left for me to use; and on
this so important occasion, as I with reason believe it to be--and I
may say that since the Philipinas were discovered there was never a
better one in them--I had no others than what, by my own diligence,
I gathered from some fishermen's cast-nets, and well they did their
duty, since they fished so well on land.

When I left that city I told your Grace that, even if I found myself
in the utmost need, I should not turn my prow back thither; but first
should go to the land of the enemy, and my duty should be well done. If
I have accomplished this against so many difficulties as your Grace
may see, I believe there are few men who would not have been moved by
the circumstances and the necessity which urged me on. When I was most
pressed and the troops most in want--so much so that it would bring
pity to the heart of anyone who saw it, no matter how hardened he was;
for their shirts, shoes, and hose but ill sufficed them, and their
food was only a dish of rice with nothing else--even at such a time,
I conquered the island; for we may say that it is already conquered,
as the larger part pays or gives tribute; and I hope, God willing, that
a year from now the whole island will pay us. All this occurred in the
midst of the winter, in water waist-deep, with no change of clothing,
and the men weary from head to foot. What I think most of is, that I
kept the men free from discontent, which seems almost a miracle. And
when it was understood that I must depart for lack of supplies, I put
in the warehouse eight hundred sestos of rice of forty gantas each;
and I supplied almost the whole camp for a month and a half with the
crops; the Spaniards and Indians brought in food enough for another
month, and the friendly Indians did the same. Much more than what was
gathered was destroyed and ruined, as it was not the harvest season.

On all these occasions soldiers and captains worked so gallantly that I
have never before so much regretted being poor, since I cannot provide
them with some little part of all that they deserve. The sargento-mayor
and Captain Juan de Valencia arrived on the twenty-eighth of the last
month in a fragata, in which they had been despatched from that city
to Butuan. They brought a thousand sestos of rice and some fish,
wine, and some clothing which Captain Guenca gave them in Zebu,
together with other articles. Very luckily they were retarded, as I
had also been, so that they did not arrive earlier; for if they had
been twenty days earlier the enemy would have taken them without fail.

The friendly natives were so alarmed at this that even those from the
village of Tanpaca, who are near to this fort, withdrew their goods to
the tingues, and did not feel safe. They thought that we were dead,
and told us to eat, for we must soon kill the Terrenatans. It is
strange what fear they felt of the latter, incomparably more than of
us; although immediately after this victory they said that we were
more valiant than the others, and that there was no people like
us. When the fight was over we had no place to store the tribute
in acknowledgment of sovereignty which the friendly chiefs offered
us in token of friendship, paying it in rice, for at the time of the
invasion from Terrenate, Silonga had not threatened them, or made them
abandon their good purpose. Immediately upon my arrival I sent to get
it, and to prepare them, and to tell them that they might be certain
that they would always be under his Majesty's dominion, and likewise
to collect the acknowledgment. On this mission the captains, Juan
Pacho, Guerrero, and Grabiel Gonzalez were sent with eighty soldiers;
and six days ago they informed me that the natives were very firm in
their friendship, and that they were busy harvesting the rice which
they were to pay. Lumaguan and his people were doing the same thing,
being obliged to pay seven hundred sestos of clean rice. In order to
collect this, all the men had to pass on to the great lake [_i.e.,_
Lanao] for which this island is famous; and as the fame of our works
had spread throughout the whole island, two chiefs had already come
down from the lake to say that they did not wish to fight with the
Spaniards, but to be their friends and pay them tribute. Thus I
hope, through God, that inside of twenty days the whole country will
be settled; and while sending down the people already mentioned,
I myself shall go out in person and go along the coast of the lake
and of the cape of San Agustin. Four days ago there came to me word
from another chief who wished to be friendly, that the Terrenatans
are leaving this road and passing on; for there was not one of them
who did not drop his arms and flee. I shall go as far as La Canela,
subduing all the country up to that point. This will not detain me
long, as I shall follow down the coast and on the way meet the fleet,
which was to be despatched from those islands. As it was already so
belated when I arrived, it would have been in danger if I had not
come to its rescue, and might not have arrived here. I have also
kept merchant vessels from the islands of Jolo and Taguima during
this whole time. Thus far they have been giving help to the enemy,
the most important which they have received; but as they were present
at the defeat of the Terrenatans, they are little disposed to remain
with them or favor the people of Buyahen. I warned them to be waiting
for me at the end of January at La Caldera with the tribute, so that
I should not go to their country to punish them. If they do not give
it, perhaps I shall do so, as it will be the most certain way.

As I have had no letter from the lord governor I do not know what he
may have ordered concerning the continuation of this establishment;
but I can say this for myself, that even if he orders me to desert it
in so great need as it is, without giving the least information as to
the situation in which I now am, which is very different from what I
have hitherto thought it, I should not do so. For if it is not kept
up for the good which it may be hoped will result to the country, in
order to make up for the damage which it suffered in being laid waste,
then it must be done for the consideration that its condition will be
like that of all the Pintados, which were laid waste unmercifully. And
as these affairs are not well understood there, perhaps they thought
it sufficient to station here, or at La Caldera, fifty soldiers as
a garrison in order to keep the country in check. Those and as many
more will be a breakfast to these natives on the day when they do
not see that things move on so effectually as now; and they would
have done the same thing to those who would have remained in this
fort, when I was told to withdraw the rest of the camp to Zebu. In
short, I have done this only of my own free will, for good or evil,
and without advice--not because I am not given to taking it on all
occasions, but because in this country it has always turned out ill,
and few are brought into friendship through force.

Neither do I think of wasting time in besieging Buyahen any longer;
because, by the means which I have now taken, I shall reduce it to
peace with much less difficulty. I am negotiating a marriage between
Raxa Mura and the sister of Xlunao, who is the chief of this village
of Tanpaca. He is willing and anxious for it and has already embarked
to come to see me. As he is a boy, although he is respected by all,
his uncles Sali and Silonga would not let him do so. They have
hindered him, warning him that he will be hanged. He is importunate
in his desire to come, saying that he has no fear of the Spaniards,
because he has done them no harm; and his father, Dimasanca, was their
friend and paid them tribute, and why should they do him harm? As
his uncles are so much to blame they are keeping him back, thinking
that they cannot receive the mercy that Raxa Mura will, on account
of their treacheries; and that, if he came, they would be lost. If
they could make sure that they would not lose their heads, they would
all be friendly and the island would be pacified. But it is enough
that Raxa Mura should be friendly, wherefore Captain Juan Pacho is
under orders to carry on this negotiation through the mother. If this
plan of mine is not successful and fails, they must be overcome by
want where they now are; for I have them so close pressed and hemmed
in that they are not lords of the land a pace from their fort, and
they will die of hunger, as neither salt nor fish can enter to them,
and their crops have been taken from them on all sides, so they must
either die or surrender. And what makes them more reasonable is, that
three days ago I took a fort at the place where I have the galliot
from Vutil. I have closed the river in such wise that there is no
way to go up or down it, and I have there a captain with twenty-four
soldiers. They were greatly affected by the defeat of Terrenate;
and as they had put their hope in that they lost it thereby as much
as if they had been defeated. Sali and Silonga called a meeting of
all their people and sought their advice as to what to do. All the
timaguas and other chiefs told them that there was nothing to do
but become the friends of the Spaniards and pay them tribute. They
answered that they would not pay tribute, but would fight first,
and they warned them that they should do so. They all answered that
they did not wish to fight with the Spaniards, for it was well known
that that meant to go to death. The advice that their people gave
them was good, but it pleased God that they should choose the worst.

If there had not been such a lack of rowers I should have traveled
by means of two hands and forced their respect. But I have so few
Indians, and keep them so busy in all kinds of ways that we should be
thankful for what has been done. They must have harvested much rice
likewise in other parts, and therefore a considerable amount of that
to be sent from there [Manila] can be dispensed with. I have something
more than four hundred Indians, and two hundred and fifteen Spaniards,
counting soldiers, sailors, and gunners. Some of these are crippled and
maimed. The war of men continues. Although I understand that this will
be more costly to me than was the Terrenate war, two soldiers only have
been lost--one of them having his head carried away by a cannon-shot,
and the other one his bowels by an arquebus-shot. I sent asking your
Grace if you would have those conveyed back to Manila who are no longer
capable of service. It will be a gracious act to favor their cause.

In the last letter which I wrote to your Grace I gave an account of
the products of this land, so far as they were known up to that time;
and now I am doing the same with what has since been observed. In the
first place the country is healthful, as has been clearly shown; for
if the want, hardships, and privations which the troops have suffered
here in mid-winter had occurred in that city, not a man would have
lived through it. The climate is incomparably better than that of
that island [Luzón]; for in the whole year there are not six days
of extreme heat, and the evenings, nights, and mornings are usually
cool. Gold is found in all parts, although not in large quantities,
but it must exist where there are traces of it. Throughout the whole
island there is a great deal of wax and much tortoise-shell. Rice
is sowed in all parts, and in some places in great quantities. They
raise fowl, goats, and swine in all the villages, and wax they do
not save. There is a great quantity of wild game, which is excellent,
growing larger than in other places.

There are a great many nipa and other palms, although more than twenty
thousand palm-trees have been destroyed. The people of the tingues are
farmers and stock-raisers, and would plant a great deal if directed
to do so; accordingly, four hundred or five hundred Spaniards could
be very bountifully supplied here, and even more. They are in an
excellent position for trade, for they are at a very few days' journey
from all the islands of Maluco, Xlatheo [Matheo?], Borney, and Xaba,
and they lie on the route of the galleons which ply between Yndia,
Malaca, and Maluco, and which anchor at La Canela. The only thing to
be feared is that the men from these galleons will enter the island,
doing damage, and making a bad name for us. It would take a miracle
to lose it. The worst thing that I see is that it should be divided
into encomiendas, as otherwise the soldiers will work willingly and
even without further recompense than what they may happen to get. And
accordingly it seems but just that the masters should come and give us
support, or that they should leave us, who are well satisfied with it.

Two or three encomenderos only have sent their attendants; and they
might as well not have sent them, because they have not provided
them with provisions and supplies, but the king has had to furnish
them. If this is all that is necessary, they have done well to stay
at home forgetful, and let us fools labor here for them. And it seems
to me that there has been sufficient deceit, falsehood, and cunning
used with the lord governor with their false excuses. Let them come
or give up, for otherwise I believe there will be no one to continue
the work. Let them build ships and boats; since most of them hold
encomiendas, from which they can pay for them. Of one thing they may
be certain, that so long as I am on the island no tributes shall be
collected there unless in the meantime there shall be another order
from the lord governor; except that I shall have them collected and put
in the treasury to cover the expenses of this pacification; for thus
far I have knowledge of no assent or approval, and therefore I shall
treat it as if left to me. Thus far I have founded no settlement; for,
although the situation of Tanpaca is good and healthful, it is far from
the sea, so that it takes a fragata five or six days to come up and go
down from here. There is no other site of importance, and from now on
until things are more settled it is inexpedient to leave this river; I
shall therefore postpone such an enterprise until a better opportunity.

More than thirty pieces of artillery, although small ones, have been
won from the enemy, and more than five hundred boats have been defeated
and captured; and up to the time of the peace more than eight hundred
people have died or been taken captive.

On the twenty-sixth instant the sargento-mayor came down from exploring
the great lake. He found upon it a village of eight hundred people,
which immediately surrendered peaceably and paid acknowledgment. There
were no more in that neighborhood. And as all the people there pay
tribute to these people, they denied having any more than a few
tinguianes [_i.e.,_ hill people]. When they were told to notify the
villages, they said that they could not, for they were at war with
them; that this was the boundary of their nation; and that it would
take a large body of troops. It could not all be explored on this
occasion, because it would take more time than our troops could
afford. It is understood that the people of this district are all
farmers, and by nature like the Vizayans; they have much cotton and
wax. This part of the lake is clear, and has a swift current, owing
to the strength of the rivers which flow into it, and which have
every reason for being populous. We shall examine it soon; the reason
for our not doing so this time was that Silonga knew that the chiefs
and principal men of his party wished to go over to our side, paying
tribute and obedience unto his Majesty. Seeing himself deserted on
all sides without them, and that they were all leaving him, he came
out of Buyahen with a large number of troops and went to the village
of Dato Mindum; and there he cut off their path and kept them all
hedged in. The sargento-mayor and the other captains, considering that
since he was so bold as to take up a position where he was without
fortification, he must have confidence in the number of his troops,
and that for some eight days more or less the victories which God has
given us up to now should not be spoiled, therefore put off attacking
him till they should have a new order from me. Accordingly today,
the twenty-ninth of the said month, I am sending Captain Ruy Gomez
with forty soldiers more, and three hundred friendly Indians and more
supplies. He has orders to attack the village. We should lose much if
the troops came down the river without attacking Silonga; the more he
has at stake, the more he will lose. For I know the worth and value of
a Spaniard, and it is not a good thing to hazard them without a great
deal of consideration. I hope, God willing, that if the enemy wait they
will be badly beaten; and if they flee to the chiefs who wish to go
over to our side, that will increase their wish and confirm them in it.

Thus far no fragata or other ship has arrived except that of the
sargento-mayor which I sent back from here, and even if this had
remained in Zebu, it might have brought word from the lord governor
regarding the prosecution of this business. He comes here with no
more knowledge than we have; the only thing of which he leaves us
in no doubt is that he comes without the means to pay or succor
these poor troops. If this be true, I am much astonished at it;
and it appears to me that this is afflicting them too much and will
give them an occasion to make trouble and rebel some day, taking one
of the galleys and the artillery and going where they list, as has
already been done in two cases. In the one case a barangay and four
soldiers mutinied and went away, no one knows where. Although they
took an officer, he had no power to prevent them, for they rose in arms
against him. The best that he could do was to have them put him ashore
and in this way he came back to this fort. The three soldiers who were
posted on the galliot which was at Vutil conspired and took the small
boat and fled. Your Grace may see, from the eve of the feast, what
sort of feast-day may be expected, especially from troops suffering
privation and hunger, who do not leave their arms day or night,
working for others and receiving no pay. With so small a ration of
rice they are ill sustained for any length of time; for the little
meat and fish which was sent was so insignificant and arrived in so
damaged a condition that there is not enough for eight days. Finally,
on this ground of pay they would be justified in mutiny. They are
seeking all about for food and clothes, which, if they had received
the pay, they would not have lacked; and at the same time they could
be commanded and obliged to serve and keep the regulations--which are
every day broken, and we cannot punish them. Another band attempted
flight a few days past, one of whom I hanged--although it weighs on
my conscience now that I have done it; for, in a sense, they have
excuse enough. Since I did not shirk it, I inform you of it now,
to relieve my conscience, before God and his Majesty.

While writing this, word came to me from the captains who are up
the river, that from the mountain ridge, from a creek called Malago,
there had come a chief with several peaceful Indians. This is worthy of
note, since they have come so late, without waiting for a suggestion,
since they have never seen our faces, and since they have come many
leguas, dressed in clothes of cotton and of medriñaque, which is a good
sign. They say that there are many people in their country. I hope,
through God, that soon all will render obedience to his Majesty, and
that every day will give occasion for the report of more gains. May our
Lord grant your Grace many years, and His protection, as I desire. The
fortress of Tanpaca, January 4, '98. Your Grace's humble servant,

_Don Juan Ronquillo_




Report of Conditions in the Philippines


_By Antonio de Morga_

What is to be said of the condition of affairs in these Philipinas
Islands is as follows:

_Instruction and instructors of the Indians_

1. The evil example set by the religious through their vices, indecent
behavior, gambling, banquets, and festivities.

2. They trade and make a profit in their districts, from rice, wax,
wine, gold, boats, fowls, cloth, and deerskins, to the great detriment
of the Indians, as well as that of the entire country.

3. They deal openly in merchandise of the above-mentioned articles,
as well as in those of China, in the trade with Nueva España.

4. They usurp the royal jurisdiction, hearing, according to the due
forms of law, suits among the Indians. They have stocks, prisons,
and place of detention, where they vex, whip, and otherwise afflict
the Indians, compelling these to obey the laws they themselves make,
rather than those of the king's magistrates.

5. They distress the Indians by demanding their services as rowers;
and contributions of rice, wine, fowls, and other things, with but
slight payment, or even none.

6. They employ many more Indians than are necessary, who serve in
many capacities without pay.

7. They levy many excessive fees for baptisms, weddings, and funerals,
and then neglect to reserve the episcopal tax.

8. They erect large churches, houses, and monasteries for only one
friar, or at the most for two. They often remodel and rebuild these
edifices at a great expense to the royal treasury, encomenderos,
and Indians.

9. They put forth strenuous efforts to oblige the Indians to bequeath
at least a third of their gold and wealth to the monasteries, for
which gifts they receive more honor at their death, so that others
may be roused to do likewise. Those who do not thus give are buried
like beasts.

10. In the churches alms-boxes and chests are placed, in which they
compel both men and women alike to drop their offering each one singly,
diminishing their property.

11. They insist on the continual formation of brotherhoods and erection
of shrines, so that these may be endowed and adorned and may receive
new alms--the Indians understanding no more of the matter than the
display and ostentation of the offering.

12. Every monastery has, usually, a great many festivities, which
are all attended by the friars throughout the whole province. These
are accompanied by many Indians, for the purpose of bearing their
hammocks, rowing for them, and acting in other capacities. Thus,
year after year, the friars go from one village to another, dragging
the Indians after them, and causing great expense.

13. The religious levy many contributions on the Indians for the
expense of their festivities, for triumphal arches, castles, and
dances. These entertainments are receptions which they compel the
Indians to tender, as a welcome, to their provincials and priors,
to whom breakfasts and dinners are given also. These festivities
occur frequently, and are conducted with much worldly show and expense.

14. They are very careful to exact that all the Indian girls,
especially the young and most beautiful, appear at the gates of the
monastery every day. They converse with them, showing partiality to the
handsomest among them. When a new prior arrives or any other person
for whom the religious wish to make a special display, these Indian
girls dress themselves carefully and call to see them. Besides this,
there are other things which it would be offensive to tell.

15. The superiors commonly send young friars of but little education
and no very good example to these curacies. Their conduct is such
that the Indians hate them as enemies. Thus the Indians profit but
little by the instruction, and acquire a distaste for the law of God
and His gospel.

16. They generally spend their time disputing with the
alcaldes-mayor. Especially if the latter do not coincide in all their
opinions, they persecute and harass them, until they even compel them
to leave the country.

17. They accept and encourage complaints and tales by private persons,
even though they may be false and unjust; for this enables them to
preach to and reprove the people and also the ministers of justice,
so that they themselves may be feared and respected. And they do this
with great indecorum and license.

18. By means of special study and persistent effort, they strive
to participate in government affairs. They desire to have a hand in
everything, and to take part in all matters, through the medium of
conscience and theology, by means of which they interpret and pick
flaws in his Majesty's ordinances. But rarely do they allow his orders
to be executed, unless quite to their taste and liking.

19. Many of them undeniably have contracts with the factors,
encomenderos, and known capitalists in the trade with España.

20. They are attended by a great following of Indian boys, who serve
as pages and servants. These are well dressed, wearing liveries and
gold chains. They carry their hats for them in the streets, while
in the monastery they assist them in the cells. Each one, however,
has his own special servant.

21. These servants, together with other Indians whom they have with
them, who are taught to play on the guitar and other instruments, are
made to dance, execute lively songs and dances, and to sing profane
and immodest tunes. Thus they entertain their guests, setting a bad
example to the Indians, without profiting anyone.

22. When they find themselves gainers in wealth, their principal
thought is to try to return to España with their profits. This
disturbs many here, for by divers ways and means they endeavor to
obtain permission to carry out their design.

23. The orders send many each year, under the pretext that they are
going on business for the order. They do not take into consideration
that they are needed here, nor the expense to his Majesty in sending
them.

24. The more spiritual among them try to go to China, Xapon, Camboxa,
and other kingdoms, in order to preach the gospel, unmindful of their
duties here, for which they were brought. This anxiety makes them
restless, and they invent journeys and conquests which disturb the
rulers and the Spaniards. All this gives rise to other objectionable
things.

25. They will accept no curacy in any province, unless rich enough to
suit them. They abandon the rest, so that there are many islands and
provinces whose people ask for baptism but are unable to obtain it, for
the lack of persons to administer it as well as to impart instruction
and to live with the Indians to see that they do not apostatize.

26. Many of the religious treat the Indians very cruelly, just as
if they were slaves or dogs. On failure to please, they are beaten,
or subjected to any penalty that presents itself, on the pretext that
they were remiss in attention to religious instruction.


_Ecclesiastical judges and prelates_

27. They meddle with the royal jurisdiction. Hitherto they have not
been restrained, for they would immediately pronounce excommunication
and offer other insults.

28. In the cases tried by them, they practice notorious coercion,
insulting the parties to the case, executing all that they decide
and determine, whether right or wrong--and all this without having
any education, or having any person to guide them.

29. The religious have attorneys who speak both languages, and
interpreters, whom they invest with authority, and from whom the
Indians suffer innumerable offenses and many grievances.

30. Their officials and clerks collect excessive fees and do not keep
to the fixed rate.

31. Although his Majesty had ordered no pecuniary fines to be
imposed on the Indians for any cause or pretext whatsoever, they
are compelled to pay fines of gold and reals, which decrease their
property and estate.

32. Some of the judges are quite at variance with others, especially
in regard to conservators; and they excommunicate one another and the
town, with considerable offense and scandal. Bulls and briefs have
been published, unknown to, and not passed or received by, the council.

33. When complaint is made of the excesses and crimes of any
ecclesiastic or religious, their superiors do not punish them. On
the contrary, saying that it does not befit the dignity of religion
to say that they have committed crimes and that they have received
punishment, they let the matter drop.

34. The ecclesiastics and religious quietly take away from and add to
the instruction at will, and without the supervision of the governor
and the ecclesiastical superior, contrary to his Majesty's orders. This
occasions many difficulties. They do not allow the bishop to visit
their curacies, for fear that the injustice of their action will
be discovered.


_Secular government_

35. Negligence and carelessness exist in making the laws, and more
in enforcing them, in regard to matters pertaining to the care and
advancement of this kingdom, and its good government--and especially
to the royal decrees sent by his Majesty, most of which are suspended
or not effectively observed.

36. Concerning provisions and all other necessities for human
existence, each one is a law unto himself, does what he pleases, and
sells as he wishes, without any fixed price, measure, or system. Hence
provisions are growing steadily worse and dearer. The natives and
Chinese trade, bartering and retailing, which, as above stated, results
in the injury and high price of provisions, while the merchandise is
adulterated or counterfeited.

37. The thorough efforts which are needed are not made to prevent
the natives from becoming vagabonds and idlers; and to make them
cease to be peddlers and traders for gain. They must be induced to
cultivate the soil, make their cloth, and occupy themselves with
their different kinds of work, as they did formerly. Then the land
was more productive and they were better off.

38. It is necessary rigorously to restrict the Chinese from going
about as they now do among these islands for trade and profit, without
any system, robbing the country, enhancing the value of articles,
and imparting many bad habits and sins to the natives. They also
explore the ports and harbor entrances, and reconnoiter the country,
that they may be able to work some injury when occasion offers.

39. It would be very advantageous forcibly to eject all the Sangleys
who are scattered throughout the islands--namely, those who are
protected by the alcaldes-mayor and the religious--because of the money
that they take out of the country, and the injury they cause to it.

40. These Sangleys should not be allowed to have parians in certain
towns of the islands, where there are but few Spaniards. The justices
harbor them there for their own profit, and the harvests that they
gather from them and their ships, as in Manila. This might prove
very harmful and injurious, and renders it necessary that, at the
very least, the ship coming to trade shall dispose of its cargo as
quickly as possible, and return to China with all those who came in it.

41. It is only just that, when the Sangleys arrive with their ships,
they should observe the proclamations issued which prohibit them
from bringing many people. Penalties should be exacted, and when
the Sangleys return they should take as many people as they can,
thus relieving the country from the many here who are an injury to it.

42. We must endeavor to have them sell the merchandise brought by
them from China freely to any person who wishes to buy; and we must
see that no advantage is taken of anyone, either in their ships or on
land, under severe penalties intended to prevent such acts--from which
arise obvious injustice, and the increase of the price of their wares.

43. An order must be given to the Chinese to sail early for these
islands, so that, during the month of May, their goods shall be sold,
and their ships go on the return voyage. This is the best thing, both
for the safety of their voyage, and the prevention of so excessive
prices on their goods.

44. We must endeavor to have them bring good merchandise, not defective
or spurious. As they are an unscrupulous race, they adulterate the
goods, which they would not do if they saw that notice was taken of
their action, and that the goods that were not up to the standard
were burned.

45. All possible care must be taken to prevent their trusting their
goods to Spaniards, for without knowing them, the Sangleys let them
have the goods at an enhanced price, without personal security; and
afterward the Sangleys tire themselves and us in trying to collect
the money, so that credit is lost.

46. Action should be taken, so that these Sangleys should
not be afflicted as at present by any judges, constables, and
interpreters--who, by various pretexts and calumnies, cheat and rob
them, and perpetrate much fraud, coercion, and bribery.

47. The great number of Sangley interpreters must be decreased. These
serve for no other purpose than to commit innumerable acts of bribery,
corruption, and fraud with the Chinese.

48. It would be much better for the Chinese who become Christians not
to dress like Spaniards. The latter should resume their accustomed
labors so that it might not be necessary for many Sangleys to remain
in the country to perform the needful service. They should cultivate
and till the soil, which they do not do at present, because of which
arise many bad results.

49. Measures must be taken to enforce his Majesty's decree, under
severe penalties, so that the royal officials, clerks, and guards
who register and appraise the merchandise of the Sangleys in their
vessels, shall not take the goods for themselves, or pick out the best,
or give promissory notes. This is very unjust and oppressive.

50. The Chinese captains and merchants should be ordered, under
penalty of being imprisoned and fined, to bring saltpeter, iron,
and other metals, which they have refused to bring of later years,
and of which there is great need.

51. When the Sangley ships are about to depart, they are ballasted
and loaded with lumber. This should be prohibited, for they fell the
trees for this, and in a short time there will be a lack of wood here.

52. All the Japanese coming hither in their vessels would better
be sent back to Xapon. Not one should be allowed to settle in this
kingdom.

53. Those already here should be banished to their own country, for
they are of no benefit or utility; but, on the contrary, very harmful.

54. On departing, the Japanese are wont to take cargoes of silk and
gold, which are merchandise intended for Xapon. This should not
be allowed until the Spaniards have made their purchases, for it
increases the price of silk.

55. The Japanese and Chinese strive to take many deerskins as
merchandise from these islands to Xapon. They hunt for these, and
buy them from the Indians and even the religious, who give and sell
them. This traffic must be stopped, for it is very injurious to the
country, as the animals are killed solely for their skins, and thus
the supply of game will become exhausted.

56. The flour, biscuits, and wax brought from Xapon are suitable
commodities for this country. Some persons have already become so
keen in their plans to dispose of these goods that they buy them
by wholesale, store them, and retail them. This must be prohibited,
and an order issued to the effect that this state shall be provided
and supplied with them at moderate rates.

57. It does not appear that the alcaldes and regidors of Manila use
their offices to the good of the state, but each for his own private
interests. They must be instructed in their duties, and punished for
any negligence.

58. There is no system in regard to the provision of beef, for
there is no one who is compelled to provide it. What there is,
is not properly cleaned. It is not cut, divided, or weighed with
equality and fairness. As the regidors and people in authority are
the owners of the cattle, they weigh and sell them as they please,
without observing any system.

59. There is likely to be a scarcity of rice, for the city does not
make the necessary provision for it. Those who have this grain--the
encomenderos--hoard it and make a profit from it, selling it to the
Sangleys at high rates; and thus it becomes dear. The same thing is
true of fowls. The rate fixed is not observed, and no one takes any
pains to enforce it.

60. Fish is the most abundant and most general food supply. The
Indians do not occupy themselves, as formerly, in fishing, but leave
this work to the Chinese. These avaricious and interested people have
raised the prices, an evil that must be restrained and checked.

61. The fishing is done with salambaos, [7] and with fine-meshed nets;
with which they block up the bay and kill the small fish. These nets
ought not be employed, and the size of the mesh should be regulated so
that the supply of fish will not be exhausted; for already experience
has demonstrated that they are not so abundant as formerly.

62. We have gardeners and kitchen-gardens now. Although there were
none before, yet the price of vegetables has increased beyond any
former price. This occurs because of the lack of fixed rates, and
because a man is kept on guard in the market-place to prevent robbery
by the soldiers and other people. Now this man allows whatever price
the Sangleys may name, which results to his profit; for they pay him
for it, while he strives only to keep them satisfied.

63. Considerable trouble exists here in regard to the current silver
money, because the Sangleys generally cut and clip it, and because they
cut into many pieces the single reals for the trade in small articles,
for which formerly they bartered with rice. This truly serious abuse
must be corrected by an ordinance.

64. In both the conduct and dress of men and women, unwarrantable
extravagance and license exist. Rich and poor, and chiefs and common
people alike, all wish to dress in fine garments, have their wives
carried in chairs attended by pages, have carpets in the churches,
and many other unwarrantable luxuries, from which arise many
difficulties. As far as possible this condition of affairs must
be remedied.

65. In Manila the men are accustomed to gamble for enormous and
excessive stakes; whatever of this sort is especially objectionable
should be corrected. During the visits and intercourse of the women,
their chief diversion is to play cards, and more commonly than is
becoming to their station. Men are admitted to these games, from
which might arise greater evils. This matter requires attention.

66. For very just and necessary considerations, the Sangleys have
not been allowed to sleep in the city. This measure should still be
enforced rigorously.

67. There are a great number of Indians, both men and women, in the
city of Manila, who are vagabonds of evil life, living in the houses of
the Spaniards. Their own houses they use for receiving the goods stolen
by their slaves, and for their revelries. The Spaniards aid them,
and thus waste the provisions. They are retailers and secretly buy up
the provisions at wholesale. They commit other sins and do much harm,
as is notorious. Therefore it is necessary that they be expelled from
the city and sent to their villages and parishes, and made to work.

68. The country is becoming filled with black slaves and Cafres,
[8] brought by the Portuguese, and these are the worst that the
Portuguese have. They do a great deal of damage, transgress the law,
and will cause the ruin of this city and country; for they rebel at
least every year, seize vessels, and take flight, committing many
outrages and thefts. It is contrary to the law to bring these slaves,
unless very young, but this law is poorly observed. It is advisable
to take the measures necessary in this matter.

69. Large fires have occurred in the city of Manila, and are constantly
occurring. Although many of the buildings and houses are of stone,
still many are made of wood, or of bamboo thatched with leaves of
the nipa palm. It was decreed that all be covered with roof tiles,
but this law is not rigorously enforced. It is advisable to have this
law observed, both to diminish the danger, and for the well-being of
the city.

70. The streets of the city are in poor condition, and are very
uneven. During the rainy season, they are almost impassable, and
should be repaired.

71. In regard to the public works of the city--the cabildo's hall,
the prison, and the slaughter-house--they should be constructed as
soon as possible, for their absence causes great hardship.

72. The Sangleys are buying gardens, estates, and other country
property, which may prove harmful. They are also establishing
themselves in these lands, and in the houses of some of the orders,
contrary to his Majesty's ordinance. The small size of this country
may render this more harmful than in other countries.

73. Monasteries have occupied several of the streets of the city, and
a portion of the space between the fortifications and the houses. This
needs investigation.

74. In the offices and places of gain belonging to the country, the
men employed should be selected with regard to merit and skill, and
for no other reason. Especially if they are incapable, or excluded
by royal decrees, should they be refused employment.

75. The same with regard to the provision for repartimientos and
encomiendas of the Indians.

76. The people of the country wish to be maintained in peace and
justice. They desire the punishment of all crimes, but object, on
account of the newness of the country, to penalties which affect
property, in the case of insignificant offenses.

77. It is requisite that, in the treatment of their persons,
and especially of those who merit consideration, those who are in
authority show the people respect, courtesy, and affability.

78. Those in authority must avoid having a great following of servants
and retainers; and those that they do have they must pay and recompense
from their own pockets, and must not bestow on them the offices or
profits of the country. This is a very unjust proceeding, as there is
not sufficient even for those who serve, because of the small extent
of this country.

79. Those in authority must refuse to allow such servants and friends
to trade and make contracts, and to buy goods at wholesale and to
embark in commercial enterprises; because they exercise much coercion
and inflict many wrongs--spreading the report that it is on behalf
of those in authority. No one, therefore, dares to institute a suit
against them.

80. The said relations, servants, and friends of those in authority
ought not to be permitted to become regidors or city officials;
for besides being incapable of filling such positions, and having no
experience in the ways of this country, they only serve to deprive
the others who fill these offices of freedom of action, so that no
necessary measures can be enacted in their cabildos, if it is at all
against the will of those in authority.

81. His Majesty's orders, contained in many decrees, to the effect that
none but inhabitants of these islands should engage in trade here, must
be put into rigid execution, as well as all else in them concerning
the inhabitants, for this is the only salvation for the country.

82. In regard to the weight and cargo in the vessels sailing to Nueva
España, it is essential that those in authority protect the citizens,
since there is but one August and one harvest. They should strive to
allow the citizens to pursue their occupations freely and leisurely,
and to have the cargo loaded by those only who can justly do so.

83. Just as it is requisite to use restraint sometimes, in order to
prevent the troops in this land from going on some enterprises, so
likewise expeditions and pacifications must be arranged as a means of
employing them; for as idlers they gain nothing, nor does the country
receive any profit. At other times it is necessary to allow some to
return to España, for thus others will lose their fear of coming to
this country.

84. The hospitals, especially that for the Spaniards, ought to be
greatly favored, as they are the asylums for all the needy. The same
is true of the house of Santa Potenciana.


_Affairs of war_

85. Those in authority must not give the companies or other garrisons
into the charge of their relatives, friends, or servants, especially if
they are mere youths and of but little experience. This is a notorious
wrong, since there are so many deserving men who are suffering and
dying from hunger.

86. Every man in the royal garrison must serve in case of war, and
none should be excused because of being a relative, servant, or friend,
or for any other reason. There are many who are thus excused.

87. The captains and officers ought to be more painstaking in
disciplining and drilling their soldiers, and in knowing what arms
they possess, and whether they are in good condition. The men should
be well treated, disciplined, and thoroughly under control. They
should not gamble away or sell their clothes or arms.

88. When a soldier commits any crime for which he merits punishment,
his captain must not hide or palliate the offense, in order to save
him from prison or from being punished--as is done quite commonly,
to the great injury of all.

89. It is indispensable that the walls and fort should be always kept
in repair and garrisoned.

90. The same is true in regard to the artillery, of which there should
be a good supply, but of which there is at present a great lack.

91. Warships ready for any emergency are needed; but at present we
have none.

92. There are but few arms in the armory, and those few are rotten
and out of order. This need is notorious; and all classes of weapons,
especially muskets and arquebuses, must be made.

93. Carrying arms out of the country must be prohibited. This is
done quite commonly by the Portuguese and by the natives, and is a
proceeding which causes great injury.

94. Gunners are greatly needed, as we have but few of them, and these
few do not understand artillery.

95. The artillery is badly mounted, and left exposed to sun and
rain. The caissons and wheels are rotted and of no use. Balls and
cartridges are all mixed up; besides, none of the other supplies are
laid out so that they can be used when occasion (much more a sudden
emergency) may require.

96. The gunpowder should always be well refined, and stored
in different places, and not in one house, in order to prevent
accidents. This should be done with the other ammunition.

97. The soldiers' lodgings at the garrison need rebuilding, as they
are inadequate to the needs of the men, who will not then suffer their
present necessities. Also this will do away with their disorderly
conduct in the city by day, and especially that at night.

98. It is extremely necessary to adopt some system with regard to
payment, so that the soldiers would not squander it in gambling. A
portion should be retained and paid out each day for food and
clothing. Through this lack of system much suffering has resulted,
and many soldiers have died. Consequently many are unfit to serve.

99. The soldiers should be kept as busy as possible, for in Manila
they give themselves up to laziness and vice. When most needed, they
are found to be undrilled, and so unfit for their work. Especially
should they be made to go aboard the vessels as often as possible,
for in these islands it is very necessary that they go to sea and
know how to fight on the water. In fact, this is generally the kind
of fighting to be done here.

100. In the other cities and places of these islands, it is necessary
that the magistrates and the officers of war should always be on the
alert, ready themselves, and their Indians also, for any emergency
that should arise. They should have ships that would inspire respect;
because enemies or corsairs are apt to attack them, with whom they
lose time and reputation by not hurrying to encounter them.

101. Expeditions and enterprises for pacification or conquest outside
of the islands must be scrutinized very carefully. Before going on
them, it must be understood and determined that those sent on such
expeditions must give account and residencia of their duties and
methods of procedure.

102. In respect to crimes committed by the soldiers, when these are
slight offenses there is but little to register, or little judicial
procedure to be observed; but when they are of greater import, and the
penalty therefor is severe, it is just that the case be registered and
substantiated so that the proper course of justice may be observed,
and so that they may be prosecuted in due form of law.


_Justice_

103. As for justice, there has been much negligence in punishing
public excesses and faults. Many things--and some of them of great
importance--have been overlooked or covered up. This has led to other
irregularities, such as reckless, continual, and fraudulent gambling,
and concubinage.

104. From Nueva España many disreputable men, condemned to the galleys,
are brought here, and allowed to disembark and go where they will,
dressed and armed like the rest of the people. They are not often
tried; and not only do they not pay the penalty for their crimes,
but even commit other atrocities and crimes here.

105. The ordinary judges are lax in their duties, are not prompt in
finishing the business of the advocates, and in fact, neglect this
duty greatly. They do not patrol or visit suspected places, nor watch
over the government, supplies, and civil affairs of their districts.

106. The chief aim of the alcaldes-mayor, corregidors, and assistants,
is trade. They buy up by wholesale the products of the land, especially
rice and other food supplies, exactly as is said above concerning
the religious of certain curacies, and their interpreters and helpers.

107. They try old suits of which they cannot know the details, and
stir up many suits and processes among the Indians, at great expense
to the latter.

108. Neither they nor their clerks observe the schedule when levying
the fees. In their own behalf they afflict and trouble the Indians
with outrageous requirements, making them cut wood, serve as rowers,
and perform other services.

109. The first thing that they do, on entering their provinces,
is to lay hands immediately on all the property of the communities,
and to use it for their own advantage. When their offices expire,
they seldom return the property to the community.

110. If they collect any fines belonging to the royal treasury, or to
expenses of justice, they conceal them, keeping no book or account
sufficient to enable such fines to be demanded from them. The same
is true of the tenths of gold.

111. It is not advantageous for these alcaldes-mayor and corregidors,
or their assistants or friends, to receive the royal collections, for
they perpetrate numberless frauds and cheats, both against the royal
treasury and against the Indians; and there is no remedy for this,
as they themselves administer justice. They hold the collections in
their possession for a long time, trading with them, and the royal
treasury is the loser.

112. They leave their provinces when and how they please, without
permission of those in authority; and when others are appointed
to their offices, they immediately depart, in order not to have
their residencia taken. Thus they are not to be found in office,
and escape being made to give satisfaction for the injuries that they
have committed, and being prosecuted by justice.

113. They are not accustomed to obey the commands and orders sent
them by their superiors unless these suit them; for this they must
be severely rebuked.

114. Hitherto their residencias have been decided and taken with all
mildness and little investigation, so that they have lost all fear,
and dare to lead lives of carelessness and hypocrisy. Therefore it
would be advantageous to take their residencias more strictly, so
that they should live hereafter with care.

115. They do not watch carefully so that the religious shall not usurp
their jurisdiction or meddle in matters that do not pertain to them;
they do this in order not to have disputes and quarrels with the
religious, lest they themselves should not be allowed to live and
buy and sell as they please. This is a detriment to the public service.

116. Those in authority ought to refrain from asking or requiring the
alcaldes-mayor, corregidors, etc., to supply them with provisions, or
other things from their provinces, even when they pay for them; for,
in the name of those in authority, they do the same for themselves,
much more and with greater freedom, and to the greater loss of the
country. Then they lay the blame on the one who ordered it, thus
excusing themselves.

117. Many are haughty and disrespectful to the religious and ministers
of instruction, always inclined to contend and disagree with them. This
is also disgraceful and of little profit for any. Severe measures
must be adopted in this regard.

_Encomenderos_

118. They pay no attention to the schedule in the collection of their
tributes, and usually practice frauds to violate it.

119. They collect tribute from minor Indians, and from the aged,
the lame, the poor, the dead, and the fugitive--their oppressions in
this respect being well known.

120. They employ the Indians in building houses and large vessels,
grinding rice, cutting wood, and carrying it all to their houses and
to Manila; and then pay them little or nothing for their labor. They
use them also for their own work for many days without pay.

121. They themselves administer justice in their village, arresting
and whipping their Indians during the collection of the tribute,
besides committing other notorious acts of violence.

122. They pay but little attention to the instruction of the Indians
or anything pertaining to it. They pay grudgingly the stipends of
their curacies, as well as the money for the building and adornment
of churches. In this regard they are at continual variance with the
ministers, and the Indians are the losers by it.

123. Although not authorized to remain in their villages longer than
to collect the tribute, they go to and live in them at many other
times. This proves a great burden to the Indians, because of the
annoyances, and the requirements of services and contributions with
which they afflict them, and which constitute the only purpose of
their going.

124. At other times they send collectors, who are very unworthy and
have no compassion on the cause of the Indians, whom they afflict and
maltreat worse even than do their masters, and do them more harm. In
most cases, these collectors are not approved by those in authority,
nor do they, bear permission from them.

125. They dispute and quarrel with the magistrates on slight
pretexts, and incite their Indians not to obey them or listen to
their summons. This they do quite commonly, whenever they fail to
find the judges unwilling to shield them in whatever they choose to
do in their encomiendas. If they act in harmony, it generally means
more injury to the wretched Indians.


_The royal estate_

126. These encomenderos conceal in great part the amount of the
tributes collected by them, and show only partial lists of the
collections. Usually they retain the amount in their own hands for
a long time, before bringing it to the treasury.

127. The most important thing here is the royal treasury, for on it
all the people of the islands depend; yet it receives the least care
and the poorest management.

128. There is little thought given to ensure its increase, or to
prevent its decrease. There has been a great falling off in the matter
of tributes, tenths of gold, and other taxes that belong to it. Some
excellent provisions for its management were ordered in the past,
but are neither carried out nor even considered.

129. The royal officials have no statutes for their guidance, beyond
some decrees of the governors, which do not cover all the requirements
of their offices.

130. The royal books are not kept with the requisite clearness and
system. Entries are not set down with exactness, or at the right
time. The officials commonly use loose memoranda, which may give rise
to much loss, although it may not be fraudulent.

131. All the officials do not go over the work. On the contrary,
many different matters are put in charge of one alone, such as the
collections of the duties and other things, account of which is
rendered to the treasury after a long time. In the meantime the
treasury is the loser.

132. The officials very often receive royal property at their
residences without passing it in to the treasury. They use it to
suit themselves.

133. The notary of the exchequer is not present when money is paid
to or from the treasury, and it is done without him, contrary to his
Majesty's commands. This may give opportunity for wrong and fraud.

134. In order to accommodate individual debtors to the treasury,
orders and notes are often received on account for the payment,
and then they try to realize on them.

135. They have been seen to receive into their houses, from collectors
and others who were bringing goods to the treasury, great amounts
thereof, which they employ in their own affairs and needs, not
depositing them in the treasury for a long time.

136. They have used the royal tributes of rice, wine, gold, and cloth
in the same way.

137. The royal warehouses were entirely under the control of the
factor for a long time, with less assurance of safety than if they were
under the control of all three officials. Some time ago, they were put
under control of all three, but these have entrusted the keys to three
servants or followers. This arrangement, far from increasing the royal
estate, is an excuse for them to draw pay from the royal treasury;
and it does not satisfactorily fulfil the royal intention--namely,
that these officials should carry the keys on their own persons,
in order to avoid all damage and loss to the royal stores.

138. There is little interest taken in selling and administrating
the goods in the storehouses before they are spoiled, as has been
the case with much of their contents.

139. The timely use of rice and other supplies, and the cutting of
wood for the ships is not considered. This necessitates greater cost
and damage afterwards.

140. In the expenditure for repairing ships and other royal vessels
made in Cavite, there has been spent much more than appears by
Master de Ribera's statement, which was verified only by his word and
oath. This is a very extensive scheme, in which there may have been
considerable loss and fraud between the factor and Master de Ribera,
because the expense has been very heavy and is not clearly stated.

141. Galleys, vireys, caracoas, fragatas, and other royal vessels
have been lost because of inadequate shelter.

142. There are many places in which are employed sailors, gunners,
calkers, coopers, and other seafaring men, who are superfluous,
unnecessary, and of no service. They create notorious expense and
are maintained in these employments on account of being servants,
relatives, and friends of those in authority.

143. There are many sinecures and gratuities given by those in
authority, which are enjoyed by officials, clerks, officials of the
accounts, and royal officials--all without his Majesty's orders and
contrary to his intention.

144. Many soldiers enlisted are excused from service for private
reasons.

145. There are many more captains and their officers in the camp than
is necessary. These cause a useless expense and waste, and this is
a matter requiring reform.

146. Many draw salaries as commanders and captains of galleys, when
there are no galleys; and some as knights of the city, who do not
serve in its defense, and of whom there is no necessity.

147. The governors of the forts of Nuestra Señora de Guia and Santiago
draw larger salaries than his Majesty ordered.

148. The consignments made by the king to his treasury are confused
with other payments.

149. But little care is exercised in collecting all the royal dues
from the vessels coming from España, because they are always laden
beyond the appraisal. The same is true in regard to freight and the
dues on the money coming from España, more of which always comes than
the register shows.

150. The collectors sent to make the collections for the royal
treasury and those of the tributes do not usually bring them in
promptly; and they perpetrate many frauds and injuries, so that each
time the collections are smaller. Sometimes it has been observed that
they retain the money collected, and that with the knowledge of the
officials themselves, because they are favorites of the latter.

151. Many times they delay making the final account of the debtors to
the royal treasury, and fail to collect the balance of their debts,
on account of private considerations.

152. There are many old debts that the treasury owes, the payment of
which is unavoidably suspended. To cancel these it will be necessary to
send to the treasury of Mexico for the deficiency, with the required
authorization.

153. Likewise, as the salaries and expenses have already accumulated
to a considerable sum, we must perforce send, each year, to the said
treasury of Mexico for the means to pay it all when due.


_The navigation to España_

154. The giving of positions on the trading ships of the Nueva España
route is a great detriment to the country. In the first place this
advantage is enjoyed by those who have not served in this land,
thus depriving of it those who have served.

155. As persons who have no compassion on the citizens of this country,
they busy themselves only for their own interests, and not for the
good of the country.

156. Many of those in the naval and military service come here who
are useless and troublesome. This is a great expense to the king,
and all to no purpose.

157. The soldiers come naked, unarmed, and starving, because their
captains have only tried to cheat them.

158. The ships return loaded with the investments of the officers
of the ships. Besides their own goods, they have been entrusted with
large commissions and trusts in Mexico, which they execute and fulfil
to the great deprivation of this country. They receive excessive
salaries all the time until their return to España, which might be
dispensed with if they were officials of these islands.

159. After they depart for Nueva España with their vessels, then for
greater comfort and the better stowing of their merchandise, they throw
overboard the goods of our citizens, without any necessity. This they
do without any feeling of compassion for the many whom they ruin. It
makes no difference to them, for they are going where they cannot be
proceeded against, and where it is impossible to follow them.

160. Usually those who come in those positions are relatives and
servants of the viceroy of Nueva España. They are mere youths and
have no experience in their duties. Innumerable frauds and injuries
are perpetrated in the despatch of the vessels at Acapulco, of which
I shall not speak in detail, for that one point alone would require
a great deal of paper. Manila, June 8, 1598.

_Don Antonio de Morga_




Recommendations as to Reforms Needed in the Islands


_The inspection, as will be related_

It is very necessary and important, Sire, that your Majesty be
pleased not to entrust the inspection of encomenderos, magistrates,
and collectors in this country to persons who, after the completion of
their commission, must remain and live in the country as subjects--who,
on that account, would be forced to proceed timidly and with a
view to what might be done by persons who have been punished and
feel resentment. Nor, after the inspection is finished, should the
inspector remain among friends or enemies who have much or little
property. Neither should he remain with those of whom there is any
doubt. They are fortunate if they are such men as are suitable for
this task, and if they proceed with rectitude, rigor, and example,
and with zeal for the glory of God, the service of your Majesty,
the welfare of this country, with a Christian and disinterested
heart. Since the above qualities are clearly in accordance with the
necessity and condition of affairs, Sire, it is very necessary that he
who makes the inspection for reform should possess them. On the other
hand, since it is very difficult to find such a man among the laymen
in this country and region--where the majority of those who live or
come here care only for their own plans and individual interests,
the increase of their possessions, and other things of much harm
(so that many suffer themselves to be led by others), and from which
it is advisable that those who exercise so necessary and important
a duty be free--I do not know, Sire, what remedy can be expected;
because the governor is called upon to select fit inspectors from
this country. This is something that never will be achieved; and this
condition of affairs will be perhaps a cause of greater loss, ruin,
and offense, unless your Majesty, with your most Christian and royal
heart, shall be pleased to render this matter safe, and entrust the
inspection to the prelates themselves, so that each one will make
it every two or three years in his bishopric and district. In fine,
Sire, considering the pain and grief that they suffer at seeing the
great loss and ruin of things, and the wrongs inflicted upon this
wretched people; and, on the other hand, their obligation to endeavor
to set things right, in case there should be added the authority
therefor, should your Majesty be pleased to grant the inspection to
them--considering all these things, and also their experience of the
conditions of the country (which is very important, since they are
servants of our Lord and fearless men, who will not proceed with the
same timidity and cautiousness as others), there is no doubt that they
will be able to bring matters into a clearer light, to advise your
Majesty, and to effect great reforms. At the same time the Indians
will conduct their suits with greater tranquillity, security, and
confidence, and at less cost. This is not much to ask, since your
Majesty is pleased to entrust special matters and the inspection of
a viceroy of Nueva España to a bishop; and the same should be done
with those which are of so much greater importance, and concern so
greatly the glory and service of God, and of your Majesty, the common
welfare of these districts (rightly so favored by your Majesty), and
the alleviation and consolation of their wretched people, whom God has
placed under your Majesty's royal protection. It is true, however, that
as far as this matter of inspection is concerned, I once suggested,
among other matters, that it should be entrusted to specially chosen
private persons; but, when I wrote to that effect, your Majesty had
not appointed any bishops or audiencia for this country. Therefore it
was what seemed perhaps most advisable, considering the condition of
affairs, and the employment of the governor and his lieutenant-governor
in the government and in matters of importance so that they could
not attend to it; and there was no other more advisable method to
be discerned. Even by this method it has always been very difficult
to find men of such qualities as the case demands. However, now that
our Lord has been pleased that your Majesty appoint prelates for this
kingdom--a most useful thing for it--it is evidently most advisable
that they should have charge of the inspection because of their
experience and the great need of a provision for these matters. In
very grave cases, they could be accompanied by some auditor, if
necessary. And if your Majesty should not wish the prelates to make
the inspection, at least the inspector should be no other than an
auditor, and he should have a good salary with fees at the cost of
culprits. This is essential to produce the desired effect. But this
last method would cause greater delay and dangerous annoyances to the
natives, because of certain reasons and causes vexatious to them; for
the auditor could inspect in one year and summer but one province,
and in that would not be doing little. The next year he would have
to visit another province, and so on, until he had finished the whole
country. But if the bishops act as inspectors inasmuch as they have to
go through their bishoprics annually, each one in his own district,
the inspection would be completed in one year, and very comfortably
and conveniently, especially for the Indians. This would not be the
case, were the inspection made by others. To give the reasons for the
aforesaid, as ought to be done, so that your Majesty may be pleased
to order it, much space would be needed; and there are many evidences
and proofs that the present is the worst plan, because of the great
offenses and annoyances it has caused, as is well known. And on the
other hand this is what proves best how advisable is the latter method,
and how necessary are such special expedients, even though they should
be extraordinary, since the necessity and wrongs are so. I shall
not go into details concerning this lest I go beyond bounds. But I
shall only refer to one advantage in addition to the above, in having
the bishops act as inspectors--namely, the respect that the governor
will have for them, and his abstaining from interfering with them in
some measures that may be desirable to adopt. If he were to attempt,
by importunity or pressure of any kind, thus to interfere with other
inspectors (as he could more easily, inasmuch as they would have to
proceed with greater caution and obsequiousness), the result might
be very harmful.

_That there be fewer offices, and more extensive jurisdictions, and
that there be no assistants. It is advisable to read this section
thoroughly._

There is much to say why there should be fewer offices, because of
the great vexations, offenses, and insults endured by these natives,
as many of the offices are not properly exercised. They should be thus
exercised; for since they are not, and since the Indians look upon
those who are given and appointed as magistrates for them, and for
their welfare and protection (who by right should be the best men),
and behold in these same men so much license, wrong, and evil example,
what can they think and believe about the others, and about the law
that is preached and taught to them? since they see that it is not
kept, but only broken over and over again by us, the very ones who
profess it and teach it to them. It is apposite to mention that when
one Cagayan Indian was trying to persuade another Indian to become
a Christian, and was declaring the blessings to be derived from it,
the latter answered to his arguments: "Bah! the Castilians have no
better sense than we have; since they act as they do, and do not
observe that law; say nothing more about it." Or they say: "That law
must be only for the fathers." In this way great offenses and things
displeasing to God follow, and offense to His law and gospel, so that
it is held in odium and seems evil to these natives, just after it
has been preached to them with so great moral example and sanctity of
life--the true preaching that moves and converts this race. They do
not recognize or know that the fault is not in the law, nor can it
be attributed to it, but to those who do not observe it, because of
their necessities--or rather their baseness, vileness, and greed which
they excuse under the name of poverty and lack of support. Therefore,
a great part of the reformation in this matter--which is so important,
and demands reformation, but without having it--will be effected by
having fewer offices and larger jurisdictions. This is advisable and
necessary for the removal of many great wrongs--offenses against our
Lord, and harm to the natives. But if the contrary is done, and things
continue as at present, more troubles have followed and will continue
to follow each day that this reformation is delayed; for it will be,
as says the proverb, like rain upon wet ground. Following upon the
continual oppression, grievances, and other injuries received because
of the abuse, greed, and audacity of these wrongdoers, and the trifling
punishment inflicted upon those who have perpetrated these misdeeds,
and exhausted, as is notorious, the natives, the present injuries,
although fewer, will be felt more severely, because of the distress,
need, and wretchedness in which things are, and to which they have
come. Our only hope is in the law and charity of God, and in the will
of your Majesty constraining them to remedy the above, as well as in
the tolerance and mercy of our Lord in preserving this country and
island by saving therein those whom He has chosen for Himself. He has
not chosen them for us Spaniards, by whose offenses, great greed,
and evil examples, so contrary to the good of society and to the
gospel, His Divine Majesty is not pleased; nor does He permit so many
offenses for the sake of those who commit them, or to the end that
there should be no amendment of them. But even if no attention should
be given to anything but worldly gain alone, which we love so much,
yet even to keep some of this wretched race, we must see to their way
of life, so that they may not perish and die as happened to so great
a multitude of people in Sancto Domingo. It is well to be warned by
this example, and to notice how much diminished, reduced, and changed
are things here now, and are tending to be, in comparison with their
former condition--as is well known to those who have an experience
of both past and present conditions. Therefore, if the Indians are
not allowed to take breath, and do not receive some relief, they must
necessarily feel the burden more and more each day; for we permit land,
though it be arable and fitted to be sown and reaped, to lie fallow,
and do not exhaust it year after year. How much more with sentient
human beings; for either they will endeavor to be rid of the burden
(as, without citing other cases, was attempted but lately in Cagayan),
or they will perish under it, for it will compass their ruin, and we
ourselves shall feel the want of them, as is plainly evident. This
has been clearly manifested on the one hand, in the diminution
of tributes, the great wretchedness, and the many deaths among the
natives in Ylocos and other districts; and on the other hand in the
scarcity and dearness of that which can least easily be dispensed with,
and which is most essential--namely, rice and food supplies. Although
these advance to outrageous prices from year to year, yet even so the
necessary amount cannot be obtained, and there is a deficit both for
your Majesty's service and for individuals, whether rich or poor;
and, in short, for both Spaniards and natives. The latter are the
ones who can endure the scarcity least, for among them result from it
great want, slavery, sickness, and many deaths. Since things are come
to such a pass, much heed must be given to the importance of reform,
and to what may be feared if there is none. Therefore, in order that a
reform be instituted, two things, Sire, are extremely needful: first,
the wise appointment and choice of men for the offices--including
with this what is by far the most essential point, and the absence
of which is most felt, severe punishment for delinquent officials;
and second, that the superfluous and unnecessary officials should
be dismissed, for thus there will be fewer to plunder and offend
these new and tender plants. These evil acts constitute a great
hindrance to the increase of this harvest so pleasing to God, and
so much sought after by your Majesty. The harvest would be greater,
were there fewer evil acts and more virtue in these regions. Besides,
if the offices were few it would be easier to find the needed few
with the good qualities requisite for these offices than to find such
persons to fill so many offices as there are at present. Then too,
fewer abuses and injuries, and less ill-feeling among the natives,
will result from fewer appointments and selections, because those
who cause resentment among the natives will be fewer, particularly
in regard to offices and tax assessments, among others; for as a
result of the larger jurisdictions, there will be a smaller amount
of relationship with the individual Indians. Also, the governor
could furnish and provide honorably for certain men of merit and
desert in certain of these offices, increasing their salaries from
the extinguished offices, so that they may fulfil their obligations
and carry out their orders with greater advantage and profit to
themselves, and without harm to the natives. Likewise the curtailing
of certain salaries will be advantageous to your Majesty's treasury,
by reducing its standing expenditures and requirements.

The present salary of an alcalde-mayor is three hundred pesos, while
a deputy receives one hundred pesos. If one hundred pesos were added
to the salary of each of the former, these amounts would be sufficient
for a moderate ease and competency, and would obviate the temptations
of greed to men who are sensible and upright; and it might be easier
to appoint and select such men, if there is pay and gratuity, so that
those may receive a salary who have served, and not those who came to
get office. Whoever not satisfied with this, wishes an office, let
him change his manner of living and remove the obstacles so that an
office may be given him; and if not, then let him attribute the blame
to himself. It might even be a means to cause many, by consideration
or desire of an office, to moderate and relinquish their excesses if
there were a punishment for them, and a reward for well doing; and
if offices among the natives were not bestowed upon those who commit
excesses, even if they have served, but only to those who live in a
Christian manner, without offense and harm to the natives.

Likewise, it is a very pernicious practice to provide offices in a
haphazard manner, for services alone, or as a source of gain to those
who get them simply by favor, and have no merits or have performed no
service. This means giving office to one who has no capacity for its
administration, and no judgment of matters. Some of them have never
learned or been accustomed to do anything but fire an arquebus, and
perhaps have habitually lived in great license and poverty. Such enter
upon their offices unprovided with virtue, but in a state of need and
ignorance, and with a greed for becoming rich; and this causes much
grief, misery, and trouble. The result is that such a person has to
try and hear suits and causes; and many of those which arise among
these natives are wont to cause perplexity in their determination
and sentence, even to some men of experience and judgment. Thus the
office is heedlessly vested in one who does not know or understand how
to grant, or deprive of, liberty and possessions by his opinion and
judgment. And although there is a superior judge to whom appeal may
be made, and who may undo errors and wrongs, it is not done, nor can
it be done with the same ease. Appeal involves expense and trouble,
and a long journey to Manila that the Indians must make to ask for
their rights, obliging them to leave their houses and fields--a very
troublesome and injurious thing for them. They are often unaware that
appeal can be made; or they do not dare to go, or they look for no
relief. So all this wrong continues.

On account of these reasons and arguments, it is advisable not to
bestow posts among the natives as a reward for services alone, upon
men who are lacking in the virtue and good example so necessary to
all in these regions; and especially to those who should serve as
magistrates, and hold offices in this country, where the Divine
Majesty and your Majesty can be so well served, in case men fill
those offices with some little uprightness and decency of life.

In what pertains to and in what I say upon the subject of deputies
and to giving them a salary in addition, that is in case it is your
Majesty's pleasure to have such officers. But it would be better not
to do this, for it means two alcaldes-mayor and two notaries in one
jurisdiction, since each of those officers has his deputy and other
officials, all of whom have to eat, or rather to rob. Of a truth,
it will be sufficient for the alcalde-mayor alone to be rewarded
and to live commodiously in his office, if he does his duty. But if
he does not do his duty, and has in addition a deputy and officials,
and both have friends, all this is showered down upon the Indians, and
they pay it, with their sufferings, because they have to supply the
sustenance and gain of all. It would be much better for all that, if
two hundred pesos are required for the needless deputies, one hundred
of this amount should be given to an honest alcalde-mayor, while the
other hundred would be saved for your Majesty's treasury. Above all,
the great evils would be done away with which result from having
deputies among a harassed and wretched race--and that, too, in so
narrow jurisdictions that the alcalde-mayor is able to visit them
alone, and go now to one part, and again to another. This would produce
greater ease and convenience for the Indians for various reasons, which
are not here stated in order not to prolong this subject. Therefore
I conclude it by saying that the dismissal of the deputies, and the
reduction of the number of alcaldes-mayor and corregidors, are most
necessary for many reasons. There is only one objection that might be
considered in this matter, but it is not for the service of God and
your Majesty to abandon what is of so much import for this country on
account of it. That objection is that there would not be so many posts
and offices for claimants, and for the governors to provide and supply
people with. But as for this, it has been said that for those who have
served and merit reward there would be appointments and rewards--and
for others too, in the offices left. Hence, even if the deputies be
dismissed, and the number of offices be reduced, your Majesty has not
suppressed opportunities or posts for rewards, but exchanged them;
so that anyone who ought to receive a deputyship or corregidorship
would have a better allowance and reward, and more gain, without
so much trouble and loss--even for the very persons who hold them,
because for many this reformation is a sentence. What your Majesty
suppresses by this method and plan is only sins, offenses against the
service of God and of your Majesty, and great wrongs inflicted on
these natives. This is the most Christian and royal design of your
Majesty. Whichever is most advisable should be enacted now; namely,
that there be or be not rewards, at your Majesty's pleasure.


_That there should be a city storehouse and granary_

That there should be a city storehouse and granary, wherein should be
stored annually thirty or forty thousand fanegas of rice in the hull,
so that it may keep longer--which cleaned would amount to half as
much--besides a quantity of wine, vinegar, and oil. At the very least,
it is advisable to store the rice in this way, in preparation for a
siege or the coming of an enemy, or for any expedition that should be
undertaken. If these supplies are thus kept in store, the harassing of
the natives on such occasions to obtain a supply of provisions will be
unnecessary and will be prevented. Without this store, the demand might
come at a time when the natives might suffer great wrongs and injuries,
because such events are irregular, and might occur at a season when the
natives have not enough for their own sustenance and for seed. This
would cause great wretchedness, and would be the occasion of famine,
disease, slavery, or mortality among the natives. Besides, the prices
are not as a general thing so regulated, upon such an opportunity
and occasion, as to do the natives no wrong in that matter also.

This provision will be of great advantage, convenience, and saving of
time in making expeditions, besides serving generally as a source of
food-supply for this community, in any necessity or famine that may
arise, and as an aid to the Indians, when they are in need. This will
be of great aid to them, and they will be profited and edified to find
themselves aided and helped in their necessities and famines. This
rice must be gathered at harvest time, as it is cheaper at that time,
and can be obtained more easily and with less hardship to the natives,
if sent in sacks from the districts having the best crops and where
it is easiest to obtain it. And every year the rice in storage can
be renewed with ease and profit, by selling it and buying other new
rice at the season for it. On account of the little public property of
the community, and the need in which it was, it has been impossible
to do this; but now it has a great deal of public property that has
been granted it, and an income with which to do this. The money will
be better and more wisely spent on this than on other things not so
necessary and advantageous to the common welfare, and to the service
of God and of your Majesty.

_Concerning collectors, and a protector of the Indians_

It is also very advisable that the collectors of encomiendas be persons
approved by the archbishop as protector of the Indians, and appointed
by the governor. Your Majesty should order them very straitly to
seek and appoint the men best qualified as collectors. If, on the
one hand, such men are appointed, and, on the other, are registered
and approved by the archbishop, a great and special blessing and the
remedy of great wrongs, thefts, and offenses against our Lord and
the service of your Majesty will result. These I shall not specify,
lest I be prolix. Besides the above, it is very necessary that the
lay protector of the natives be also chosen by the archbishop and
governor, and that he may not be removed or disqualified from his
office except for known remissness and guilt, nor allowed to keep
it if he is guilty. He should have a good salary in return for his
labors, his attention to the laws, and the necessity that he is under
of opposing many influential men. And although the salary is assigned
already, it is likewise desirable that he be very much favored in
his office by the governor, so that he may petition and procure the
good of the Indians with greater resolution and freedom. Above all,
it is advisable that the chief protector be the archbishop, and each
bishop in his bishopric.


_Wages of the natives_

It is also necessary and important for your Majesty to order the
officials of your treasury to entrust and send the wages of the
Indians, for any services for your Majesty ordered to be performed
by them--such as the cutting of wood, the carrying of other things,
and personal services performed by the natives, or given by them--to
men worthy of confidence and trust. It should be sent to residents of
the same districts where the services are ordered to be performed,
particularly if the district is somewhat remote and distant. For if
the pay is not thus sent, those who did the work suffer, and, as a
rule, do not get it. The cause of this is, that those who perform
these services generally live at a distance from Manila; and by
not coming to the city, but waiting until they are paid, without
leaving their homes, wives, and fields, they allow themselves to lose
it. Many come too, but are not paid even then, which is the cause
of great harm. Loss results also because generally certain persons
perform the services, while others conduct the affair here. Since
they thus remain at home without coming to Manila for their pay (as
is the quite general practice), and send a chief to collect it for
them, before the latter gets it and the pay is turned over to those
who performed the service, a long time elapses, and they may even
never get it. For sometimes the chiefs keep it, or give it for some
pious object, at the instigation or persuasion of the religious,
and to gratify the latter at the expense of another's toil and of
the poor--who, although they would rather have their pay than give it
away, do not dare to complain, as the chiefs, to whom they are very
subject, are concerned in the matter. Thus in order not to offend
them or the father, or for other reasons, it comes to pass that the
poor wretches do not enjoy the fruit of their labor. In like manner,
it is advisable for your Majesty to order straitly that the many who
are conscripted for these services, expeditions, and ordinary works,
from Tondo and the environs of Manila, at great cost and expense to
them, be paid immediately; for their pay is due them for a long time,
and is postponed and delayed for many days, to their great vexation,
loss, and annoyance, and even to the extent of being a public offense.


_That there should be a reward for old soldiers who have served and
have no remuneration, besides others who are of rank, or who have
served in other places, or who come to these regions to serve._

There should be something to reward old soldiers who are not
remunerated, and are in need, besides the other persons enumerated
above, who come here and, because of not having been here so long
as others, appear to be excluded from the offices and advantages of
the country. There are but few offices, while there are many to fill
them, and as many offices as are sought can not be found, although the
men appear to merit them. This is one of the very necessary matters
in this country, and requires your Majesty's attention; or else,
inasmuch as it is most important and of great moment, that God and
your Majesty may be well served in this land, the governor might
be empowered to appoint to offices those who should exercise them,
as is most fitting. It is a great and necessary advantage for your
Majesty to provide this in the manner and by the person most pleasing
to you. I see very well that a governor must be appointed with liberal
authority, not only in this, but in other matters that demand it. But,
in this matter of remuneration and gratifications, it has occurred
to me, that troubles might ensue if the governor were to distribute
rewards and gratifications entirely as seemed best to him, and to whom
he wished. Hence I say that, although it is advisable and necessary
for your Majesty to appoint such a person, and very requisite that
you should be able to trust that matter to him, besides many others,
still in this case, the number of persons to be appointed might be
assigned and limited. Thus he could not do more than is necessary and
advisable, and might appoint only those who merit such advantage and
reward by their services and good qualities, and not others in whom he
finds any lack of these things, or whom he appoints from other less
weighty and just considerations. And as to what quantity and from
what fund these rewards and gratifications should be given, I think
that they should be given from what is collected in Mexico from the
duties and freight-charges on ships sailing from this country, which
are never returned here. Your Majesty could command them to be brought
here annually for this purpose, without any deficit or abatement; or
the half of them, or the equivalent of that which is collected here,
for the pay of the soldiers. In order to give these gratifications and
rewards, in regard to the amount, I think that eight or ten thousand
pesos annually would suffice. But it should be considered that there
are many who have served, and that this country is already settled;
and that many persons of rank, who have served in other places, are
coming to it, or are to continue serving your Majesty here, and come
for such continuation of service, and for whatever occasions are of
great moment, importance, and need. And inasmuch as these opportunities
are often postponed or delayed for good reasons, and are not offered
immediately; and inasmuch as those who come, and almost all the
others of this country, who are not already provided, always desire
these opportunities--therefore it is needful and important to have
the means with which to remunerate them. For if the contrary is done,
many great troubles will follow, so that, finding themselves without
occupation, and at the same time without any profit and sustenance, and
no place whence to hope for it, they become querulous, low-spirited,
and even desperate. From this condition follow many other evils--among
which, with many that I do not name, is the one of affirming that to
better their condition they must return and leave this country. This
causes others to do the same thing, and not to come here, because of
what they hear of the country. Accordingly this country, being thus
defamed, is coming to be regarded as a place of exile and punishment
for crimes; and, as to such a land, they are sending here men whom it
would be to the good service of God and your Majesty to punish there,
and never to let them set foot in a land where sanctity, virtue, and
good example are so much needed. And so harmful are the many evils
here in this new plant and vine of the Lord, that thus, Sire, it is
advisable that there be rewards and gratifications, at the least to
the sum above named, and in the form most pleasing to your Majesty,
or in the following mode. Let your Majesty order ten posts to be
provided, of the value of one hundred and fifty pesos apiece, for men
of moderate rank who have served well, and are unmarried; another ten
posts, of two hundred pesos apiece, for others who, besides having
performed good service, and being deserving men, are in greater need
because of being burdened with a wife and children and a household;
and another ten posts, with three hundred and fifty pesos apiece,
for other men, who have performed greater duties and services. Still
another ten posts, with three hundred and fifty pesos apiece, should
be set aside for men of rank and service, who are not remunerated
or employed, and have served, in either these or other regions; and
who come hither, as aforesaid, with the desire of continuing in your
Majesty's service, and who are in need--either by reason of not having
provision for so many, or because of the short time that they have
spent here. These last complain much, and beg that something be given
them, or that they be given employment, for they think that they are
deprived of it. Therefore I beg that your Majesty will command this,
as it is of so great importance, and a matter by which God and your
Majesty will be so well served. Thus these men will be kept in hope,
and come here willingly, with the resolution to serve upon all
occasions that arise; while others will be incited to come to these
regions, and to serve in them, by the knowledge of this provision. And
if some of these men should go upon expeditions, or be given employment
in other greater things, others will take their places and posts. In
this way the governor will be able to provide and remunerate those
for whom there are no judicial posts to be given. Also this plan will
do away with annoyance to the governor, and even the danger that, if
this plan be not followed, he might be persuaded or incited, by the
importunity of claimants, to make appointments differently from what
is advisable. It will be well to specify and note that such rewards
and gratifications are not to be given only to those who have spent
years of service in the country; for some have been engaged for the
most part in making collections in the encomiendas and in services
that can be paid and rewarded with very little, and perhaps they even
deserve punishment rather than reward, for some of their actions. Thus
the appointments should be given to those of the greatest merit.


_That the soldiers' pay be increased, and that it be paid them
punctually, three times a year, on the expiration of the time,
and without any delay; and that, whether it be increased or not,
an order be issued to give, as shall be declared, one meal per day
to poor and wretched Spaniards and soldiers who are without it. From
this follows what shall be declared in regard to it. It is advisable
to read this entire section_.

It is very desirable and necessary that the pay of the soldiers be
increased, for they suffer the utmost poverty and want with their
pay of but six pesos; for the country is so expensive and so needy
that they can in no manner be fed or clothed as is fitting. This is
necessary so that the spirit and honor of the soldiers may be kept
constant, and so that they may not be debased and humbled to the low
condition of becoming pages to women throughout the year. This fits
the name of soldiers of your Majesty very ill, and many of them are
now thus engaged. This is permitted to them and tolerated because
of their poverty; for when it is seen and regarded close at hand,
greater compassion and pity are felt for them. Another cause for
connivance and gentle treatment is the danger that they may commit
other greater wrongs in the way of theft and violence, to which need is
wont to incline and constrain men--and there is enough of such things.

There is also danger of their flight and desertion for fear of
punishment; and thus by being punished, the soldiery may be lost, and
the forces lessened and made useless. [After making all allowances,]
ordinarily there are plenty of them who require punishment, and more
than get it, in proportion to the universal need and poverty. Because
of these things, the raising of the pay is very important, as is also
a provision for additions to it, so that the companies may be kept
intact and respectable. For, if they have these, then respectable
young men who are in this country, and who now are leaving it, will
serve gladly. They now come usually on the footing of mercenaries,
because of their small means, and finally leave the islands--only
those remaining who are worthless and of no account, and even of them
but few. In other districts where there is no lack and need of people
as here, they ought to consent.


_That the one hundred and fifteen pesos given to the soldiers in
Mexico be reckoned only up to the time of their arrival at the port
of Cavite, and that thenceforth their ordinary pay be given them_.

This is as indispensable and needful as the matter of the pay and
means of profit, and even more so; for if this be not done, it will
be and serve for nothing else than to waste your Majesty's royal
estate, without any results for the expense--namely, the colonization,
increase, and defense of this country. Rather the very opposite in a
certain way results; and to say so is no exaggeration, but truth. For
they arrive at Cavite after a three months' voyage, and without a
_blanca_ [9] in a new land, which is much less comfortable than Mexico,
which they have left. Then in the space of nineteen months they receive
not one real of pay or remuneration, until after they have served
out the one hundred and fifteen pesos. This causes them to suffer
such want and wretchedness that I can not tell it. So many evils and
wrongs are caused that is a pity and shame to recount them. The result
is that their need abases and lowers (or rather forces) many of them
to commit thefts and other misdemeanors as bad, and worse, which I
shall not name out of the respect due your Majesty. They also marry
the Indian women, so that the latter may supply their necessities;
but the Indian women themselves do not possess those things. And
most usually there is great danger and risk of offenses against God,
and of the discrediting of the Spanish name and nation.

One other great harm follows from the above, and it is of great
moment. This is the slight credit and little esteem accorded to
the soldiers by these Sangleys, Japanese, and other peoples--and,
consequently or jointly with them, by ourselves--since they behold
them naked, ill clad, and worse conducted. The behavior of some,
as I have said, is of such a nature that out of respect I shall not
name their vices; but their actions and manners are a cause for sorrow.

It results and springs from this need that the soldiers are a
torment and a vexation to the community; and they become obnoxious
to, and are little liked and less esteemed by, the inhabitants; for
they are generally seen at the doors of the people begging for aid
in their need and poverty. It is a grief to consider and see every
one of these things--and the more so, as they are so just. And they
are felt much more by those who, with love and zeal for the glory
of God, care for and desire His service and that of your Majesty,
the welfare and increase of these lands, and the reputation of our
nation. Of a certainty this last is being ruined and lost more and
more daily. The remedy for these evils is the increase of the pay,
and provision for additions to it; and a decree by your Majesty that
the one hundred and fifteen pesos be regarded as a gratuity provided
until the arrival of the soldiers at Cavite. Only the half of this sum
should be given the soldiers in Mexico for their clothes, while the
other half should be kept back until their arrival at the said port,
without giving them any of it. This will be of much greater utility
than giving them all the pay in Mexico; for, if all is given them,
most of it goes in gambling, and whatever is left is lost and wasted
at sea. The captain of the vessel and crew becomes rich by means of
the quantities of playing-cards and other schemes to drain the poor
wretches of all their money. On this account they are wont to arrive
at the port, naked, ragged, and in such a condition that it is a pity,
shame, and grievous thing to see them. And if, beside this, they do
not receive any pay for many months, let your Majesty consider and
examine the tendency of such things, so that God and your Majesty
may be served, this country increased and settled, and our nation
esteemed. As things are now the rule is quite to the contrary; and
matters are in such a state that respectable and honorable men have
no desire to become soldiers, but only mestizos and the scum of the
people enlist. In the year ninety-four a great many of these latter
came hither. Would to God that they had no come in so great numbers,
on account of both their poverty and their evil habits. All of this
will be checked, or at least greatly remedied, by the course above
mentioned, and by keeping back one-half of their pay. With that half,
they could clothe themselves very comfortably, because at the time
of their arrival, the Chinese have come here with their merchandise;
and clothing is very cheap then, and to be had at moderate prices. In
this way they will be well dressed when they come here, and will
be considered, feared, and respected by these barbarians, and even
by ourselves. Then too, your Majesty will have more soldiers; for,
although they are not increased in respect to their number, this plan
will succeed in taking from them the causes for which they so quickly
desert, and their numbers are lessened. These causes are punishments,
and in a certain manner, the sickness and wretchedness that they
suffer--from which, together with the ordinary hardships and the
recklessness of some, many die.

It is advisable to bring the arms here on the account of your Majesty,
and not deliver them in Mexico to the soldiers; first that their
pay may not be lessened, and second that the soldiers may not lose
them on the way. Moreover, they will thus be brought from there,
and delivered to the men here, in better condition; and there will be
more weapons in this country. In conclusion, I assert that it is very
desirable that your Majesty order your governor and royal officials,
under very severe penalties, that this pay assigned by your Majesty to
the soldiers for the purposes indicated, be strictly and inviolably
kept separate in the treasury or in a separate account, and be paid
to the soldiers every four months, on the very day when it is due; and
that payment be not deferred or delayed for any reason or cause. For,
if the requisite system and order be observed in this, there can be
no lack of money; but, on the contrary, I think there will be a great
superabundance, if it is not spent for other things. Will your Majesty
order that this be not done for any reason whatever--unless, on some
occasion, after the third due has been paid to the soldiers, it may be
necessary to spend some of the money; but the pay shall be left sure
and certain, so that it be not wanting or payment delayed. This would
be a great injury, and would cause or create risk of many wrongs,
and troubles of great consequence. I say once more, Sire, that it
is very important and very necessary that your Majesty order this
strictly under severe penalties, in order that it may be observed
and obeyed promptly--without admitting, under any consideration, any
excuses fof failure to perform it; for this would be greatly against
the service of God and of your Majesty, as the cause and occasion of
many wrongs, offenses, and evil deeds, as well as of wretchedness.

Whether the soldiers' pay be raised or not, it would also be a great
relief and assistance in many cases of need (which are usual in this
community), if your Majesty, for the love and service of our Lord
and that of your Majesty, would at least be pleased to institute in
the hospital--inasmuch as there is a hospital for soldiers, and the
sick poor--or in La Misericordia, a separate lodging and quarters for
needy well people. Those there who have not the means to obtain food,
should at least be given one meal a day. By such a course many needy
Spaniards and soldiers could be aided and relieved in their most
pressing necessity, and would not die of hunger, or have to commit
thefts or other evil acts, which cause their death and decrease. In
this your Majesty and this country are heavy losers, on account of
both the expense of bringing the soldiers here, and the want and
need of soldiers. The above could be done at but little expense,
by using for this purpose the said thousand pesos for gratuities
that your Majesty orders granted annually, inasmuch as the amount
of gratuity paid to one person does not exceed ten pesos. This sum
is of no moment or great value, if spent in that way, and amounts
to nothing at all. But if spent as suggested above, it will be
of much more use to many, and those the most necessitous, and,
in addition, to the service of God and your Majesty. And by adding
eight hundred and twenty-five or thirty pesos more, from whatever
fund your Majesty may be pleased, five pesos can be spent every day
in the year on providing a good and substantial meal for about sixty
people. In short, this would prove of great relief and assistance,
and it can also be done by no means or method with more security,
than by your Majesty's putting it in charge of the Confraternity of
La Misericordia, if you are pleased so to command. It would be well
even to grant a considerable amount; for everything the brotherhood
puts hand to is to the great glory and service of God, and of your
Majesty, and the welfare of all this land. It could attend to this
also, which is of great importance. Will your Majesty command that
the plan most in conformity to your inclinations be adopted therein.


_In regard to the Seminary of Sancta Potenciana_

The Seminary of Sancta Potenciana is a charity of great service to God
our Lord, and the welfare of this community, for there are housed many
orphaned girls and the poor daughters of those who have served your
Majesty, and who have died, leaving daughters, and little or nothing
for their support and assistance. They can be assisted and reared here,
as is being done with many now in it. They live here in all virtue
and under good instruction, in great retirement, and engaged in holy
and devout exercises. Hence it results that the Divine Majesty of God
our Lord has daily and continual praises, and your Majesty prayers,
that are offered to Him for your Majesty. It only remains for your
Majesty to protect and favor this charity, both by granting it some
reward, as an aid to its support and expense; and by ordering that
there be professed nuns in it, as is the desire of this community--and
especially that the superior of this seminary be one. For this purpose
it would be highly desirable for your Majesty to have sent from Nueva
España three or four women of the sanctity, virtue, and experience
requisite. They are necessary to begin so heroic and important a
work, and to increase and further perfect it. By this God will be
very well served, your Majesty rewarded by His Divine Majesty, and
this community favored, consoled, and increased in spiritual blessings.


_That the posts on ships which ply hither be given to men of this
country_

It is important to appoint men of this country, well qualified and
sufficient for it, to the post of captain and other posts in the ships
plying to this country; for being inhabitants of the country, and men
who have to return and live in it, they will endeavor to procure its
welfare, and will fear to commit the wrong of casting goods overboard,
which is so injurious to this community. And especially is this
injurious to its poor, who suffer all the greatest hardships and
losses, as they cannot send their goods as can others who are more
powerful and perhaps less deserving. The latter load their goods in
a part of the ship which is safe from these risks; and it usually
happens that the rich profit from the good sale that they are wont
to have of the goods they send, while the poor are losers, because
their goods are not loaded or are cast overboard. If the captain is
not a man of much conscience, and only desires his own enrichment,
and not the welfare of the country, and again, does not have to live
here, but can return; and if he should commit any wrongs for any cause,
and for advantage to his own goods, it would be in vain to go to Nueva
España to beg satisfaction. If he were an inhabitant of this country,
he would fear to do wrong, in that he might not pay the penalty
afterward. Moreover, as men who do not live in this community have to
be given an opportunity of gain if they are to accept these offices,
it is better for the inhabitants of this country to make the profit,
for they will take the offices very willingly without any salary,
for the honor of the office and the advantage to their goods--both
in having a place to load them, and in making a profit from them
in Nueva España. Thus will be saved some salaries for captain,
assistants, and other officers; and to give them salaries is more of
a means of profit to those who fill the posts than an advantage or
necessity, since we have citizens, as has been said, who will accept
them without salaries. For these positions to be given in such a way
that respectable people may come to this country, it is necessary
that these officials remain in service here, instead of coming simply
for their own interest and a right to space and cargo on the return
voyage, in a country of so much worth, and so advantageous, but so
hurtful if there is a lack of respectable people.

And in order that the vessels may sail in a proper state of
preparation, and so that it may not be necessary to lighten them (as
ordinarily happens, to the great loss of the poorest and most needy,
as above said), it is especially important that the assessments and
charges for lightening be divided proportionally among all the goods
carried in the said vessels, [10] so that, the losses thus being
general, they will strive to avoid incurring them; and if some goods
are more valuable the losses may be shared among all, so that they
may be less oppressive and hurtful to the poor.

[_On the back is written_: "I entreat your Majesty, for the service of
our Lord, and your own, to be pleased to read this paper and letter
throughout; for it is important for the reasons I have adduced, and
for many others. Will your Majesty pardon my boldness and prolixity,
which are entirely born of an earnest desire, and of the necessity
of bringing forward some considerations and arguments which bear
upon these matters. Hence I was unable to shorten it, as I wished
and ought to have done."]




Reception of the Royal Seal at Manila


This is a good and faithful copy of several instruments drawn in
regard to the reception of the royal seal of the royal Audiencia
and chancillería, which the king our lord has lately commanded to
be reëstablished in the city of Manila of the Philipinas Islands;
they are set down in the book wherein is recorded the establishment
of the said royal Audiencia, and their tenor is as follows:

In the city of Manila of the Philipinas Islands, on the eighth
day of the month of June of the year one thousand five hundred and
ninety-eight, Don Francisco Tello, knight of the Order of Santiago,
governor and captain-general of these islands for the king our lord,
and president of the Audiencia and chancillería which was ordered
to be established there, said that immediately upon the arrival of
the last ships from Nueva España in this present year, on which
came the honorable auditors whom his Majesty was sending for the
said royal Audiencia, the licentiate Christoval Telles de Almazan,
one of the said honorable auditors, informed him that he had brought
and held in his possession the royal seal of the king our lord,
which was given to him by the viceroy of Nueva España for this royal
Audiencia; and the said auditor directed that an order should be
given for the formal reception of it, with the authority and reverence
which his Majesty directs and commands by his royal instruction and
decrees. Accordingly his Lordship immediately gave notice thereof
to the cabildo and regimiento of this city, and the other ministers
of justice here, that they might provide and make ready all matters
necessary for it. This day was appointed for the said reception, and,
as the governor has been advised on behalf of the city that all matters
are arranged and ready for the said reception to be immediately made,
he commanded and commands that it be put immediately in execution,
and that the royal seal of his Majesty be placed in the church of San
Augustin of this city, within a coffer covered with velvet and gold,
with the ceremony which is fitting, so that thereafter it may be taken
thence to the royal buildings, to whatever place may be appointed and
made ready for the said purpose. And for this end shall be called and
summoned to the city all the companies of infantry, both paid troops
and citizens.

Accordingly he has declared and ordered it, and signed it with
his name.

_Don Francisco Tello_

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_, clerk of the court.

And promptly, without any delay, on the said day, month, and year,
the following persons met in the royal building where the said
governor and captain-general resides, to wit: Doctor Antonio de
Morga, lieutenant-general and auditor of the said royal Audiencia;
the licentiate Christoval Telles de Almaçan, and the licentiate
Alvaro Rodriguez Çambrano, auditors of the said royal Audiencia; the
licentiate Geronimo de Salazar Salzedo, fiscal of the Audiencia; and
the cabildo, court of justice, and regimiento of this distinguished
and ever loyal city of Manila. And these persons all came clothed
in silk, and over that their Flemish robes of bright red velvet,
lined with blue taffeta. And then came a number of the principal
persons of this city, encomenderos, and citizens thereof. In the
main plaza a squadron of Spanish infantry was drawn up by companies,
consisting of the citizens of the city. Thereafter the said governor
and captain-general, and the honorable auditors, and the officials
of the city, and other persons came out from the royal buildings and
went therefrom on horseback, with much music of clarions, flutes, and
other festive instruments. They went through the streets leading to the
said royal seal, which were hung and adorned with silks of all kinds,
until they arrived at the church of San Agustin; and having dismounted
they entered. Within the larger chapel was a seat of honor covered with
bright red velvet, and thereon a cushion of the same, embroidered with
gold; and on the cushion a coffer, adorned with red velvet and gold,
and locked. All knelt, and having heard a mass, which was said with
great solemnity and dignity, the said licentiate Christoval Telles
de Almazan said to the said lord governor and captain-general that
within the said coffer lay the royal seal, which had been delivered
to him by the viceroy of Nueva España to be brought to these islands,
as appeared by a testimonial thereof which he presented, together
with the key of the said coffer. Thereupon the said governor,
kneeling upon the ground, as were all the rest, took and opened the
said coffer, and drew from it the said royal seal. He commanded me,
the undersigned secretary, to read the royal decree and instruction
of his Majesty, wherein is ordered and directed the formality that
shall be observed in receiving the said royal seal. Having read this
in an intelligible voice, so that it was heard by all, the said lord
governor turned to the city officials, and other persons present; and,
with the royal seal in his hands, told them that that was the seal of
the arms of the king our lord, which represented, his royal person,
and which all must respect and obey with due reverence and veneration,
as they would their king and rightful lord. Having finished this,
the said lord governor put the said royal seal into the said coffer,
and locked it. He took in his hands the said coffer and carried it
out of the said church with all the people and the said cabildo,
carrying the said royal seal, which was covered with a pall of bright
red velvet with gilded bars; in the middle of it were embroidered the
royal arms. At the door of the said church stood a large gelding, well
housed with a cloth of embroidered red velvet. On either side was an
escutcheon with the royal arms, and upon the saddle rested a cushion;
the said governor placed the said coffer thereon, and immediately
covered it with a cloth of brocade, and the said horse was covered. The
reins were held by Captain Gomez de Machuca, who was appointed chief
alguacil of this court; he was covered with the said pall; and before
him went the said lord governor and the said honorable auditors, and
other principal people and citizens of this colony. Behind marched
six companies of paid infantry, and many other people. They went to
the cathedral church of this city, at the door of which stood the
archbishop of these islands, dressed in his pontifical robes, with the
whole chapter of the said church and other clergy thereof. When the
said royal seal was taken down from the horse the said lord governor
and captain-general held it in his hands and carried it, covered with
the pall. Thus they went in procession to the chief chapel, and above
the steps was placed a seat of honor; on this was set a cushion,
whereon the said coffer was placed. And when this was done and the
customary songs had been sung and ceremonies gone through, the said
archbishop chanted certain prayers. Again they left the church in the
same order, the said archbishop and the rest of the clergy accompanying
them to the door. The said lord governor again placed the said coffer,
wherein lay the royal seal, upon the said horse; and with the same
pomp and ceremony, solemnity and rejoicing, they went to a hall of
the royal building, where it was agreed that the royal seal should be
placed temporarily, until the royal buildings which are being erected
for this royal Audiencia are completed. Within the said hall were
placed various carpets, and it was hung and adorned. A great canopy
of red velvet was placed there with the royal arms, and within it
another after the same fashion. Under the canopy stood a table with
its cloth of velvet, and thereon a cushion of the same stuff, all
bedecked with gold. The said lord governor placed the said coffer,
wherein lay the royal seal, upon the said table, and covered it with
the said cloth; and, with the said honorable auditors drawn up at
one side, he presented a commission from his Majesty by which he was
appointed president of the royal Audiencia, and which commanded the
said honorable auditors to receive him in the said office; this was
read by me, the present clerk of the court. And after this was done,
the said honorable auditors kissed it, and made obeisance to it, and
placed it above their heads as the letter and decree of their king and
rightful lord. And they ordered that his Lordship, having placed his
hand upon his knight's habit, should take the oath which his Majesty
commands; which, having so placed his hand, he received, as follows:

_Oath of the lord president_. "Your Lordship swears by God our Lord
and upon the holy gospel, as you are a knight, that you will exercise
well and faithfully the office of president of this royal Audiencia and
chancillería, and observe and comply with, and cause to be observed
and complied with, the ordinances which his Majesty has commanded to
be issued, and which have been issued therefor, in all respects and in
all ways, without in any way violating them. Your Lordship also swears
that you will keep secret the votes and the books of judgment, and
other things which may arise, and will reveal them to no one without
the permission and express command of his Majesty; and that you will
strive for the fulfilment of justice to litigants, and for the welfare
and increase of the royal exchequer, and for the good of the natives;
and that you will do all other things which ought to be done in so
distinguished an office, and as your Lordship is bound to do." "I do
so swear." "If your Lordship shall do thus, may God our Lord aid you;
but if otherwise, may He require account from you." "Amen."

When this was done, they left the said hall and sat in the chambers
of court; and the governor ordered Señor Doctor Antonio de Morga to
appear. He presented himself with his commission, which was read by me,
the present clerk of court. When this was done, his Lordship kissed
it and placed it above his head; and he was ordered to take the oath
which his Majesty directs, which he took in the following manner:

_Oath of Doctor Antonio de Morga_. "Do you swear by God our Lord,
and upon the holy gospel, that as auditor and judge you will obey
the commands which publicly or privately the king our lord may give
you, and will observe his royal ordinances, both those which are
given by the royal Audiencia and chancillería, and those which may
be given in the future; and that you will maintain the sovereignty,
the territory, and the provinces of the king our lord in every way;
and that you will not reveal the secrets of the royal judgments,
or others which are to be kept; and that you will avoid in all ways
and by all means any losses which might occur to the king our lord;
and that likewise you will faithfully expedite and decide the pleas
which may come before you in this royal Audiencia and out of it,
conformably to the laws of these realms; and that you will not leave
the path of truth and right either for love, hatred, ill-feeling, fear,
gift, promise, or any other cause, nor receive favors or stipends from
any grand council or corporation, for any plea which may be brought
before you to determine?" He answered, "I do so swear." "If you act
thus, may God aid you; but if otherwise may He require account from
you." He answered, "Amen."

When this was done the above-mentioned lieutenant-governor arose,
and seated himself in the said halls of court.

In the said order the other honorable auditors and the fiscal of
his Majesty were called, received, and put under oath, and likewise
the other officials of the said royal Audiencia, each one taking the
oath conformably to each of the offices. And when this was finished,
in the form above stated, the said lord president gave a general
instruction in the presence of all, in which he charged the said
honorable auditors to strive for peace and harmony, and the increase of
the royal exchequer, and to take care to attend punctually to their
duties, and to keep the secrets of this royal Audiencia, whereby
his Majesty would be served. In his name he thanked them, as well
as the citizens and others present. He charged them with the respect
which is due to the said royal seal, and to the commands of the said
royal Audiencia; and asked me, the present clerk of court, to give a
testimonial thereof. Forthwith he commanded the articles establishing
the royal Audiencia to be read. As they were not new (for some of
them had been read), he ordered that this cease; whereupon the said
Audiencia rose from session for this day. To all which I bear witness.

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_, clerk of the court.

[_Attestation_]

This copy is certain and truthful, having been corrected and compared
with the said book from which it was copied. In order that this may
appear, I have made the present copy at the request and command of
Don Francisco Tello, knight of the Order of Santiago, governor and
captain-general of these islands, and president of the royal Audiencia
here, in the city of Manila, on the twenty-eighth of June of the year
one thousand five hundred and ninety-eight, being witnesses

_Alonso de Saavedra_
_Pedro Muñoz de Herrera_

citizens of Manila, in witness of the truth whereof I have affixed
my seal.

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_, clerk of the court.

[_Endorsed_: "Testimonial concerning the reception of the seal and
the establishment of the royal Audiencia."]




Letters from the Archbishop of Manila to Felipe II


Sire:

It pleased our Lord that three years after the time when I left Madrid
I should arrive at these islands, where I came at the command of your
Majesty, with many hardships and so broken in health and strength that
I hardly had the vigor to undertake such arduous duties as confront me,
which are worthy of much remedy. I shall try to gather up my strength
until such time as your Majesty can appoint such a person as is fitted
for this place.

I remember, Sire, that at my departure your Majesty said you were
confident that I would take a load off your royal conscience. Surely,
Sire, if, as I wish, I should find affairs in favorable condition,
I would, sparing no labor to myself, strive to serve your Majesty so
heartily that none of your Majesty's servants would have the better
of me. But everything here is so run down that many years of life and
very strong arms are necessary to put affairs into even a reasonable
condition. It is only a month since I came to this city of Manila,
and so I cannot give your Majesty an account in detail of the many
things which must be remedied. But there are going to your court
father Fray Diego de Soria, a Dominican, and a man of much holiness,
learning, and very exemplary life, who has had much experience for
many years in the affairs of this country, and to whom your Majesty
should listen; and likewise father Fray Marcello [11] of the Order of
our Father St. Francis, who will give a full account of everything;
for it is zeal for the honor of God and the service of your Majesty,
and the desire for the remedy of these islands, which alone bring them
through so many dangers by land and by sea. But all I have been able
to learn in this little time is that everything is like a clock out
of order, and even in such condition that nothing will go into its
right place unless the powerful hand of your Majesty be placed upon it.

In the first place your Majesty has here a cathedral and metropolitan
church, and there is not a village church in Castilla so ill served,
so lacking in ornament as this--to such an extent that although the
quality of the ornaments is inferior, there are so few that they have
not even the necessary colors for the feast-days, although they are
in a place where silks are so cheap, as they are here. [12] Thus it
is with all the rest, and it seems as if ecclesiastics had never
lived in this country. It is served by four secular clergy alone,
to whom your Majesty orders a salary paid. The rest, although they
have the title of canons and canonates, do not serve at all, except
in their allotments and curacies. Accordingly, even on an apostle's
day there is no one in vestments at the altar for the epistle and the
gospel, which is highly discreditable. I have asked the governor,
conformably with what your Majesty charges him in the third clause
of his original instructions, to provide for this matter. But either
he is unwilling to listen to me, or, if he listens to me, he does not
wish to do so. Your Majesty will know what is fitting, but it would be
expedient to add four other salaries to the four which your Majesty
pays--namely two canonries and two half canonries, the incumbents of
which could be vested before the altar for ministration. I must inform
your Majesty that no one will be found to take them if your Majesty
does not increase the stipend; for this country is not now, as it used
to be, a cheap place to live, but the most expensive in all the Indias,
on account of the irregularity in its government. Everything has been
left in the hands of infidel Sangleys, who rob the country and sell
us things at their own price, without there being any one to check
them or keep them in bounds; in return for this, they are able to
gratify and keep content those who ought to provide for it. I do not
wish to complain of my grievances to your Majesty, but to leave them
in your royal hands. But, although our house is so small that we have
only fourteen persons, it is impossible to live for half a year and
provide for the rest, with the salary which your Majesty orders to be
given to me. Your Majesty will be informed of this by those who are
going there. If your Majesty desires that I should go about seeking
money as alms, I shall do so, so far as that would not be derogatory
to the pontifical dignity among these heathen. Again I say then,
Sire, that your Majesty's church is so ill provided, that, in place
of edifying the infidels and heathen who are here, it is a cause of
scoffing among them. They say that, as they see the monasteries so
richly adorned with ornaments that they have chalices of fine gold,
their God must be greater than that of the secular clergy and of the
friars; and they say other ridiculous things. And nevertheless there
is no one to look after it, nor any one who is grieved over it except
myself, who cannot remedy it. When I succeeded in discussing it with
the governor and the officials of your Majesty's royal treasury, they
shrugged their shoulders and said that, although your Majesty says
in the instructions in general terms that this should be remedied,
your Majesty does not point out how, or with what funds.

Besides this there is the little interest in spiritual things
and Christianity among the laity. Sire, I wish, that I were in the
presence of your Majesty to tell you by word of mouth of this matter,
which is the most pitiable thing which has ever occurred or ever will
occur to so Catholic and Christian a prince, and one on whom our Lord
has showered such singular favors as to allow in his day the opening
of the gate through these islands, for the bringing of the gospel to
realms so great, and so far removed from all that is good. This I say,
then, Sire, that it is a most pitiable thing that there is not a man in
all these Philipinas Islands--Spaniard, or of any other nation--saving
some religious, who make their principal aim and intent the conversion
of these heathen, or the increase of the Christian faith; but they
are only moved by their own interests and seek to enrich themselves,
and if it happened that the welfare of the natives was an obstacle
to this they would not hesitate, if they could, to kill them all in
exchange for their own temporal profit. And since this is so, what can
your Majesty expect will happen if this continues? From this inordinate
greed arises the violation of your Majesty's decrees and mandates, as
everyone is a merchant and trader--and none more so than the governor,
who has this year brought ruin upon the country. There comes each year
from Nueba España a million in money, contrary to the mandate of your
Majesty, all of which passes on to the heathen of China. From here,
in violation of your Majesty's decrees, cargoes are loaded for the
Peruvians and the merchants of Mexico, without leaving room for those
of this country--especially the poor, who are unable to secure any
interest therein except for a wretched bundle which is allowed them as
cargo. If I were to go into the multitude of evils which are connected
with this, I should have to proceed _ad infinitum_. There are going
to your court those who have themselves experienced them; and one of
them even, for having preached with Christian zeal, was persecuted by
the governor, who was the cause of this and of other great evils. His
vices are so many and so low and obscene that if one were to seek
faithfully over all España for a man of most debauched conscience,
even the vilest and most vicious, to come to this country and corrupt
it with his example, there could not be found one more so than he. A
priest told me yesterday--Sunday, the twenty-first of June--that it
was public talk that no woman had escaped from him with her honor, when
he could accomplish her ruin; and that further, through his great and
scandalous incontinence, he twice ordered the priest to marry him to
his own niece, and used every means with the priest and Father Soria
to secure a dispensation, although the latter showed him how little
that measure profited. He has so tyrannized over this colony by his
actions that, in order that nothing should be lacking, he has taken
away the offices of regidor from honorable men who held them; and put
his kinsmen, whom he brougnt with him from España, into the regimiento,
so that information of his evil ways cannot be given to your Majesty
in the name of the city; nor can they write to ask your Majesty that
you should send a successor to him. Likewise he asked his regimiento,
and also me (but may God deliver me from such treason!), to write
to your Majesty that it was expedient that he should remain in this
country, on account of the experience which he has here. Nevertheless,
if such a letter should go, your Majesty would consider it suspicious;
because it would be signed by some who would wish to see him undone,
only because they do not dare to do otherwise; for he treats them
like negro slaves when they swerve a point from his desires. About
eight days ago he had called to his house all the honorable people,
even to the master-of-camp and all the captains; and when they were
before him, standing bareheaded, he treated them worse than he would
his cobbler, speaking in these terms: "You don't realize that I can
have all your heads cut off, and you think that I don't know that you
have written to the king against me." And this language, with the
"vosotros," [13] he used for half an hour to the most respectable
people in this country. In short, all his conversation and words are
those of a vicious and tyrannical Heliogabalus. What I say now is
nothing to what remains to be said, and which your Majesty can learn
from those who are going there--who, as good Christians, will relate
the truth. It would appear best that your Majesty should write to
Nueba España, so that all the goods may be put on board there which
are to be carried this year. Your Majesty would then see the shameful
results which he has caused in this country. He sends therewith one
of his servants even, who is called Juan de la Guardia, and also Diego
de Montoro, a native of this country. And if by chance your Majesty's
letter should arrive after the property had already been despatched,
the said persons should be seized, and obliged to confess the truth. It
is possible that in this way, and with the cargo for next year (when
he says that he must enrich himself), a large quantity may be taken,
to supply the various matters for which your Majesty must provide. Your
Majesty may rest assured that during all the time that the governor
may be in this post your Majesty's conscience cannot be at ease,
but that it must be heavily loaded to bear with him. It would be very
advisable to appoint a governor, not like the poor men who have been
here thus far and who come to enrich themselves, but a man who will
enrich the land with holiness and virtue. It should be a man whom
your Majesty would choose among thousands--one of those who is not
attempting to make your Majesty appoint him; but, on the contrary,
one of those whom, so to speak, your Majesty asks. Your Majesty
should not consider whether or not he is a knight or a captain,
as there are plenty of experienced captains in the country, who,
in case of war, would be better in leading an army than a number
who could come from there. If it is possible, he should be a man of
education and conscience. I should desire one of these men who would
serve your Majesty without private interests, for whom, when the man
had served your Majesty in this charge, you could appoint a church,
one of the largest of España; as this post is most honorable and of
greater importance for the spread of the gospel than is the Turkish
frontier for its defense. On this account a person should be chosen who
has no claim to private interests, for the gain which he would secure
from the growth of the teaching of the gospel here is large enough. It
is not fitting that your Majesty should entrust the residencia of
the governor here to the Audiencia, or to any member thereof; but
it should be made by the person who is to succeed him, if he be a
person such as I have described. For there are many serious matters
for which a Christian and impartial judge is necessary, to clear the
conscience of your Majesty.

It would be very important for your Majesty to renew the mandate
forbidding the governors and auditors to trade, with heavier penalties;
for it is not observed, and from its violation there result great
inconveniences. But, as it appears that the salaries appointed by your
Majesty are not sufficient recompense for coming to such distant lands,
your Majesty might decree that when the governors were such as they
should be, and have abstained during their whole term from trade,
at the time of their departure your Majesty would permit to be given
them as large a cargo as they wish, and even an entire ship, so that
they might be made prosperous. The auditors might be given, every
six years, to each one the liberty of a cargo, so that in this way
they would have what is needed to marry their children and maintain
their households. For otherwise they are the causes of great losses;
and, as they are involved in the same misdeed, they are not urgent
in having the mandates and decrees of your Majesty complied with.

It is a great hindrance to the growth of the faith and morals
of the natives that there is a continual communication with the
infidel Chinese. Since they are coming to trade, it would be well
that when they finish selling their wares they should leave the
country; for from their remaining in these islands result many
great inconveniences. In the first place, on account of their greed,
they have taken to the cultivation of gardens and other real estate;
whence it follows that all the native Indians live idle and vicious
lives, without anyone urging them to labor. The Chinese have risen,
by buying and selling and bringing provisions to the community, to
be the retailers of supplies. From this it results that this country
is so expensive to live in that where a fowl used to be worth half
a real, or at the most one real, it is now worth four. Formerly a
ganta of rice could be obtained for a quartillo or less. Now it is
worth two reals, or at least one, and the same with other things;
and, beside being retailers and hucksters, one Chinaman uses more
food and wine than do four natives. What is worse than this is, that
the crime against nature is as prevalent among them as in Sodoma; and
they practice it with the natives, both men and women. As the latter
are poor wretches and lovers of gain, and the Chinese are generous in
paying for their pleasures, this calamity is spreading wide without
any public manifestation. They tell me that during the last few years
the Chinese have spread over all the islands. I saw them when I came
into the channel. Formerly they were only in Manilla. If your Majesty
does not command that this people must absolutely leave the country
I fear that God must visit some great punishment upon it. Those who
govern here deceive in regard to their status. Some of them are kept
because the fathers of the Society say thai they need five hundred to
cultivate the gardens which they have here, close by the city. They
give each Sangley, for the portion of garden which he works, one peso
and one fowl each month. Others are kept for other reasons; but all
the work could be done by the natives if the Chinese were driven out,
and the idle and vagabond were compelled to work.

In another letter I wrote to your Majesty of the necessity which
obtained in this country of establishing the Inquisition, and today
the reasons for this are stronger than then, as shown by experience
and our inconveniences. Thus we have seen, within a few years,
that two prisoners who were going to Mexico escaped from the ship
"Sanct Philipe." In the ships of last year, of three persons who went
thither, two died. A negro who was being taken along as a witness for
an accused man of this city died at sea. If it is thought best not to
have salaries, the matter can be remedied by appointing two religious
or ecclesiastic persons, and one of the auditors of the Audiencia--who,
as they are advisers, can likewise carry on the suits. These, as they
conduct the office of commissary (which is here the same thing as
an inquisitor), would be able to hear the cases and would do so as a
work of charity, and with zeal for the honor of God, until they could
obtain, from the confiscated property, salaries for the inquisitors
whom your Majesty may appoint. For it is easy to see that there is
a great inconvenience in denouncing a person in Manilla and being
obliged to send his case to Mexico, or to come from there with a
decision as to whether to arrest him or not; and to confiscate here
the property of heirs and send it to the Inquisition of Nueba España,
with so great a risk of loss.

This is all at present that occurs to me to send to your Majesty. I
fear I have tired your Majesty with so prolix and unpleasant a
narration. I beg of your Majesty to pardon me and accept my wish,
which is to succeed in the service of your Majesty. If there is a man
in the world who has this desire, unmixed with interest, it is myself,
who am desirous to be of some use so that your Majesty may learn by
experience that I am more anxious to be the most insignificant servant
of your Majesty, merely because your Majesty is who you are, than to
possess all the treasures of the world. May your Majesty enjoy those
of heaven after the many years of life which are necessary for his
realms. Manilla, June 24, 1598. Sire, I kiss the feet of your Majesty,
your humble chaplain,

_Fray Ygnacio_, Archbishop of Manilla.

Sire:

Although I wrote another letter to your Majesty in which I give an
account of the affairs in this country, I am obliged to write this
one to give your Majesty an account of my own affairs, which cannot
be successful unless regulated by your royal hand, from which I
would receive death, if I deserved it, more willingly than life from
another. It has come to my knowledge that the governor of these islands
is writing to your Majesty and complaining of me. As everything which
I shall say now is true, I beseech your Majesty to give it credit. If
your Majesty should find that I do not tell the truth to the last word,
I charge your Majesty to visit upon me a heavy punishment.

I brought with me from España a son of one of my nephews. He is
a youth of great virtue and worth, with no manner of vice; and,
desiring that he should choose for a wife someone who was his equal
in worthiness, while coming on the ship my eyes fell upon a daughter
of the licentiate Tellez de Almansa, an auditor who was coming out
to this royal Audiencia of your Majesty. She is a very honorable and
good woman, and as it appeared to me that that was what was fitting
for the young man, rather than greater beauty or property, I made
known my desire to a doctor of theology, who was traveling in the
ship, in company with the said auditor, so that I might know whether
her parents were favorable to my intentions. As he told me that they
were pleased with it, but that the father reflected that he had no
permission from your Majesty to marry his children, it appeared to
me that, if she were to marry without the knowledge of her father,
he would be free from the penalty of the law. I wrote to the said
maiden a note, in which I desired to learn her wishes, without there
being anything else in it which could offend anyone.

I gave her an account of the many good qualities and characteristics
of the young man, and addressed her in these words: "And neither
do I wish that you should attempt this without the permission and
knowledge of your father, because I am not setting about to steal
away or ruin the respect which I have for him, and have had all my
life." She answered me by writing that she was pleased at the choice
that was made of her person, and that it should be considered with
her father. I responded with a second note in which I thanked her
for her good wishes and said that I would speak with her father. At
the same time I summoned the auditor Almazan and told him how much
I desired that that marriage should be consummated. He told me that
he would accept it at once, if he dared dispense with the permission
of your Majesty. The truth is, that I did not tell him that I had
written to his daughter, and accordingly when someone told him, it
appears that he resented it somewhat; but when the letters came to his
hand, and he saw their terms, which were so unworthy of suspicion,
he was appeased. All this came to the knowledge of the governor,
after we landed; and, as he does nothing good, he made poison of
the whole matter. Without seeing a letter or complaint against me,
it appeared to him expedient to have a meeting of religious prelates
for my case, and he did so accordingly. He called them together in
one of our convents, named [San] Francisco del Monte, [14] where
he placed before them the letters without having examined them, and
without displaying them; and, with the utmost ill-feeling and evil
intention he asked their opinion as to whether it was expedient to
write a letter against me to your Majesty. The religious took it ill,
as they should so bad a speech, and did not answer his proposition,
considering that he was so causelessly throwing suspicion upon the
purity and integrity of their prelate, who had not even been twenty
days in the country. All this came to my knowledge within two hours,
and, as the matter was so serious, and so great an injustice had been
done, I confess that I was much more exasperated than was fitting;
and I uttered against him various harsh remarks--although all were
true, and about things which were publicly told. I learned that he is
writing to your Majesty against me, and I desire that your Majesty
should not lack a true knowledge of the affair, which is, as I have
said; and everything made less or more, your Majesty may believe,
is not truth. Nor could any one, from any word or sign of mine,
have understood an offense to God in that, or even a venial sin;
and, if anything could be added without the suspicions conceived by
his malice, or rather by his evil life and habits, the fault which
I was guilty of was becoming too angry. But I assure your Majesty
that I had more than reason enough--in the first place because he
had stained that which is so important for prelates of the church,
namely, purity; and, in the second place, because he did this at the
time when I had just arrived at my archbishopric, and when I should
have entered with great honor and reputation for virtue, especially
among infidels. In the third place, he went before all the leaders of
the religious orders, when everyone of them was free to conceive what
opinion he would of me--and especially certain persons who, as they do
not themselves live with becoming regularity, might conceive boldness,
and not fear for their own faults because they saw the superior prelate
brought before the public as guilty of similar ones. In the fifth
[_i.e.,_ fourth] place, because he called together this conventicle
while he was pretending to be my friend; for the day before he had
been in my house, and talked with me about very serious matters, and
at his departure, invited me to his house--for no one who would see
what he did, or his dealings with me, would fail to have confidence
in him, since he is a knight, and wears the habit of Santiago, and
is governor for your Majesty of so great a realm; and I say that,
as I am a frank and truthful man, I would have confidence in him,
if he were a man worthy of trust. Since he first made advances, by
asking me to do for him things which were good, what a wonder it is
that so unreasonably he should molest a man. I confess that I acted
in a manner unbecoming my position; but let him say what he will,
I have said nothing which is not true.

Many men of sound judgment have wondered what object he could have
in this assembly; and they can think of no other unless it was
to intimidate me and close my mouth, so that I should not write
against him to your Majesty any of the infinite amount which might
be written. Likewise he had the same object in calling together the
captains and leading men of this colony, to address them with such
insolence as that which I have told your Majesty in another letter;
for the expression which he used was: "You people [_vosotros_] do
not know that I know what you have written to his Majesty against
me; and that his Majesty sent me a command to have your heads cut
off." From this your Majesty will gather how the government must be
conducted here, since the governor is going about seeking, by cunning
and deceit, to frighten people that they may not write about his
mode of life. I told enough of this in the other letter, and others
are writing the same thing; but at present I shall only mention a
few things. In the first place your Majesty should not inquire into
the particular vices of Don Francisco Tello, but should picture to
yourself a universal idea of all vices, brought to the utmost degree
and placed in a lawyer; this would be Tello, who is your Majesty's
governor in the Philippinas. He is not one of those men who accompany
a vice by a virtue, and among many vices follow one virtue; but he
has not even an indication of a virtue. And that he should not lack
the sin of putting his hand upon the altars, he has now begun to
commit simonies, and to live excommunicated, selling for money the
presentations which he makes to the benefices conformably to your
Majesty's right of patronage. This is so true that I have this week
corrected one which he committed in the convent of San Francisco del
Monte itself. Abandoned by the power of God, he paid for the evil which
he had done against me with so great a vice. He received four hundred
pesos, for the presentation to a prebend, which he presented to me
that very day. He has become accustomed to do this, and says that he
is going to write to España that he is going to this said convent,
which is a heavenly garden, belonging to descalced fathers of much
holiness. Although he has a house near there he is not content with
it, but comes in and meddles with the convent, and with those who go
to see it, for there is nothing which his hand does not profane. On
Monday afternoon before St. Francis' day, this year, he left Manilla,
saying that he was going to Cabite to despatch the ships. At night
he left the road with a servant, having placed the horses within
some chapels which are being built at the convent of Santo Domingo;
and entered to sleep that night in the house of a married woman, the
wife of an honorable man of this city, leaving guards at the door, for
thus imprudent is he, although God permits that he is such a coward
as not to enter into such evil acts without taking guards, and even
sometimes arquebuses, to serve as witnesses of his sins--which are
made public, to the scandal of all the people. Sire, I do not believe
that I can live with this man; if your Majesty thinks that it is best
for your royal service to keep him in this government, your Majesty
must take me from this church. I wish nothing else, and even this
place I do not merit; nor did I seek it, nor did it ever pass through
my head that it was possible that at any time I should have to hold
it. But I wish your Majesty to command me to return, to die in my
cell in peace; for if I remain here I cannot conceal so many and so
public offenses against God and against the service of your Majesty,
without reprehending them with the same publicity as that with which
they are committed. I trust through the mercy of God that your Majesty
will see all this with Christian and Catholic eyes, and will provide
a remedy fitting for the service of God and of your Majesty, whom may
our Lord protect, for the long years which we need. Manilla, June 26,
98. Sire, I kiss the feet of your Majesty, your servant and chaplain,

_Fray Ignacio_, Archbishop of Manilla.




Letters from the Bishop of Nueva Segovia to Felipe II


Sire:

With my soul filled with a thousand afflictions, I write this letter
to your Majesty, awaiting a certain consolation for this unfortunate
community; since the man who is the only protector of all Catholic
countries in the world, as your Majesty is, must be the more so of
this land which is so thoroughly your own, since it is entirely
the establishment and edifice of your Majesty. Your Majesty has
a governor here, namely, Don Francisco Tello, who, if a fourth be
true of all that is said of him by Christian, learned, and prudent
men, and those in office in this community, both ecclesiastic and
secular, is one of the worst men whom your Majesty has in all his
estates. One thing I can say, and that is that neither on my way
from Nueba Hespaña here, nor after my arrival, have I heard anything
said which would indicate that this man is a good governor; but I
have heard and hear every day increasing and innumerable evil acts,
evil in the highest degree. During the time since I came here, which
is already a considerable period, I have seen nothing good in him
which would lead me, on any account or in any manner, to have any
consideration for him. If your Majesty were pleased to desire to know
particular instances, I am certain that there has been and is being
sent to the royal Council of the Indias so much concerning him that
the Council could easily inform your Majesty of matters concerning
this wretched man; and I shall only relate two or three things, which
everyone knows. The first matter (of which your Majesty must certainly
have information) is, that this man married a woman between whom and
himself there were two obstacles--in the first place, consanguinity;
and, in the second place, relation by marriage. In her case there was
still another obstacle, in that she had taken the vows in a religious
order. Although there were so many and so impassable obstacles, they
procured a dispensation in this [_MS. torn_] so that Don Francisco
might marry her. [I tell your Majesty of this] for love of the common
welfare, and so that he might not by his licentiousness destroy this
commonwealth, which is enslaved, more so than any other in the world
or even than any person, so much are all men subjected to the good
or ill will of the governor--not only the principal persons, but all
others. And further, Don Francisco would have it that this should be
considered sufficient cause for giving so many dispensations, and
in matters so difficult--namely his own unbridled incontinence and
lust--rather than put a check to his vileness. God has permitted this
blindness so senseless in a man, so that we may see in Don Francisco
that, when God takes His hand from a man, neither his honor, nor his
word, nor the fear of God, nor of your Majesty, nor the fact that
he is placed in so public an office and is the minister of such a
king as your Majesty, is sufficient to check him. If the chains and
bonds of matrimony had detained him, the dispensation and past evil
acts might be endured; but according to the report, although these
are not matters which I can examine into, he is still continuing in
these vile acts of his, as a man without God, law, or king.

Another instance: an affair characterized by covetousness, wrongs, and
injustice, which are being perpetrated before the sight of God and all
the world. This is the affair. There is here a vessel which is called
"Sancta Margarita" which belonged to Captain Stevan Rodriguez. This
boat he despatched this year to convey cloth and merchandise from this
city to Mexico. There is a record of what this same ship took last
time; and according to the register (which is here and in Mexico)
the vessel loaded two hundred and fifty to three hundred toneladas;
but this year there was not allotted among the citizens of the islands
more than a hundred and sixty toneladas. All the rest, up to the
said number of two hundred and fifty or three hundred, he has seized
upon. This injustice and robbery is terrible, but the circumstance
makes it even more remarkable that sin and greed and vices so blind
a man that he considers everyone else blind; and thinks that they
will not look at this ship and see its size, when it is present here;
nor remember that, in this same ship, the same persons with the same
merchandise laded ten times as large a cargo; nor does he consider
that, at any rate, the registry of this same ship exists.

On the day on which I write this, which is the last of June, when
the ships should have sailed days ago for Mexico, because they
might encounter a wind which would make it impossible for them to
leave this bay for a long time, and the voyage would be lost, or
undertaken when the ships would be wrecked--during this time he is
entertaining guests and making feasts and gambling. Certainly, Sire,
considering the injustice and grievance which he is inflicting on
the poor subjects and vassals of your Majesty, and considering him so
taken up with these feasts, there occurs to me the history of Nero,
when he set fire to Rome, and stood rejoicing while the street was
burning and being consumed; or, as a learned and pious man said,
it seems parallel with the idea which Nabuchodonosor carried out
when he desired that the people should adore his image, and ordered
that thenceforth there should be much music and feasting, so that
the people, thus deluded, should not even think of him without at
once committing an act of idolatry. Just so here all is feasting,
so that in this way the people may be prevented from thinking; and
that, thus deluded, they should busy themselves with this until the
evil record be finished, and the ships depart.

How can I tell your Majesty of the affairs of war? Although we are
every moment fearing some movement from Japon, this man will not build
a single turret to finish the wall. He considers himself safe with a
dark retreat which he built to retire to if the enemy should take the
city; but if the enemy should take a single house of the city, he is
as well fortified there as are the Spaniards in their retreat. For,
with the cheap labor of Chinamen, they have built here so that every
house is a fortress. God has granted to this country a Spaniard of
great genius, good birth, and singular virtue, who came with Don Luis
Perez das Mariñas. This Spaniard cast artillery very ingeniously at
this post where I am at present, which is on the river in the middle
of Manila. During all the time that I have been here I have not seen
the governor go to examine this work, or have anything more to do with
it than if it were in Constantinople. In short, his God is his belly,
and his feasts, and the vices and sins consequent upon this. That
his drink may be cold he uses from the warehouses of your Majesty
an endless amount of saltpeter, which is difficult to procure. He
expends an immense amount of powder in his feasts.

To fulfil my duty to God and His faith, and to your Majesty, and the
fidelity of a vassal, which I particularly owe, through the obligation
placed upon me by being bishop, I say that this man has no good in him;
nor is there anything bad lacking, to make him in the highest degree
a bad governor. Every instant that the remedy is delayed will bring on
more surely the wrath of God by delivering us into the hands of Japon
and other worse enemies or scourges. The only remedy is to appoint here
the good Don Luis Perez Dasmariñas, a well-known knight, and proved
to be just and discreet, with long experience in these lands--and,
above all, with great respect for God and His laws and those of your
Majesty. He is a friend of prayer, and believes in considering his
affairs with God. He need not be embarrassed in coming here, nor come
loaded down with persons to whom he is bound. And if perchance Don
Luis should not be available--although it certainly appears that he
is so, particularly since the coming of the Audiencia--for the love
of God may your Majesty not send us a person who is so boastful of
being a knight; but rather a nobleman, a prudent soldier, who will
be alone, and neither greedy, nor brought up in the vices of Sevilla,
nor with the braggarts there. It seems to me that I have said enough
of this. Manilla, the last of June, 1598.

It is said that he is sending great presents, and will try in that
way to maintain himself here.

_Fray Miguel_, Bishop of Nueva Segovia. [15]

Sire:

After I had written your Majesty my grief at the condition of these
islands, a number of Chinese, both Christians and infidels, came to
me, all bewailing the grievous injuries that they suffer daily from
your Majesty's officials and other Spaniards. They delivered to me two
letters addressed to your Majesty, and written in their characters and
language and after their manner; and I had these letters translated
into Castilian characters. These people have no other protection than
the Order of our father St. Dominic; and, as I am the head of that
order here, they have recourse to me for protection, asking that I send
the letters to your Majesty. I assure your Majesty that these wretched
people are receiving so many wrongs and injuries, that there are no
greater enemies of the immaculate Christian law than are many of your
Majesty's officials here. Your Majesty has provided, and well, that
the possessions of the Chinese should not be disturbed or the best of
them taken away, inasmucn as this is one way of ruining both Spaniards
and Chinese. But this order is not in the least observed. Your Majesty
will credit me with freedom from any exaggeration in regard to the
Order of our father St. Dominic. At present it is sending one of our
principal friars, who is prior here at Manila, named Fray [Diego]
de Soria. He knows more about these islands and countries than many
even of those who remain. He will give you information of everything,
if your Majesty wishes. Manila, July 5, 1598.

[_Endorsed_: "The bishop of Nueva Segovia, July 5, 98. Received April
6, 600. Bid the archbishop and governor to exercise great care in
the fair treatment and instruction of these Sangleys; and let them
see that no injury is done them, so that no harm may result to their
settlement."]





Letters from Francisco Tello to Felipe II


Sire:

Last year I wrote your Majesty an account of the state of military
affairs. What has happened since then is as follows.

The pacification of Mindanao was undertaken by General Don Juan
Ronquillo, who fought with the enemy and eight hundred Terrenatans who
came to their assistance. He destroyed and defeated them, killing a
number of people. Just when the ruler of Mindanao had offered to make
peace, Ronquillo received my order to retire with all his forces to
La Caldera, as I did not know of the successful engagement. Before
this he had written to me, after having conquered the enemy, that,
on account of this success and the improvement of affairs, he would
not, even if he should receive an order from me to do so, retire until
affairs were more settled. However, when my order arrived, he was in
some difficulties, and therefore left that place and retired to La
Caldera, which is near. There he built a fort, and before he departed
thence, he received my second order to remain at the river of Mindanao,
the first place taken, and build a fort there. Not only did he fail to
comply with this order, but he has returned with all the troops except
a hundred men, leaving everything there exposed to danger. I reported
this to the Audiencia, and after they had examined the papers thereof,
I resolved to arrest the said Don Juan, accuse him, and after trying
him, convict or acquit him. [16] Affairs being in this condition,
I sent aid to La Caldera, which was very necessary; and I wrote to
the army, encouraging them to persevere in the service of your Majesty.

It is now eight months since the rising in the province of Cagayan. The
country is in rebellion, but it is true that the encomenderos gave
cause for the disturbance by oppressing the natives with tributes,
and in other ways. The one who caused most harm in this respect was
Don Rodriguez Ronquillo, who died while in prison for this cause. The
addition of four reals to the tribute, which was collected last year,
also helped to rouse the rebellion. When I considered the serious
harm which might result from the uprising in the land, I sent the
master-of-camp, Pedro de Chaves, with competent troops, in order
that, by means of kind methods, he might reduce them completely to
the service of your Majesty. I ordered also that the increase in the
tribute be suspended; and this has been done and will be continued
until your Majesty is pleased to order otherwise. I think that,
until the affairs of this land are better established, say for six
years, these four reals should not be collected; but your Majesty
will provide according to the royal pleasure.

The master-of-camp arrived with his troops at Cagayan, and in
conformity with my order he pacified that land; and Magalate, the
leader of the Indians, was killed by some soldiers in ambush. [17]
This Indian had so much ability, authority, and shrewdness that he
could have caused much damage if he had lived. The master-of-camp
has now returned, and I am examining the papers which he brought
with him. Although it is thought best to punish some of the subdued
Indians, it is being done with mercy; for the bishop of Cagayan has
told me that he holds a certain decree of your Majesty, whereby it
appears that the war waged against those Indians at their conquest
was not fully justified.

There have also been other uprisings of the Çambales blacks [18] in
Pampanga, but they have all been suppressed by the effective measures
which are so necessary in this land. I have succeeded in pacifying
an Indian by the name of Casilian, who is the chief of the Çambales;
and I am trying to bring him to this city, and to change the site of
his settlement, in order that we may have more security.

There is always suspicion of Xapon, and, according to the advices which
I now have, those people desire exceedingly to come here, although
it is difficult for them to do so by ship. Consequently, I am, and
shall be, well prepared for them, with arms in readiness. Garrisons
are always maintained in that part of the country by which they would
approach, namely, in the province of Cagayan. I have great hope, God
helping, that Japon will be subdued. Several prominent persons there,
with whom I have friendship and communication, have written to me. I
have replied to them, and sent them presents, as must be done with
these people. The one who is most friendly is the general of Coria,
named Gentio, who is close in the order of succession in the kingdom
to the Conbaco. [19] He wrote me that, although not a Christian
himself, he is a friend of Christians. Having this good-will, he might
receive the holy gospel, and I am trying to bring this to pass. This
communication is secret, being without the knowledge of the Conbaco,
who is very much hated in his kingdom, because of his great tyranny.

The ambassador Don Luis de Navarrete, whom I sent to the Conbaco,
arrived there safely with the present which he took with him. The
elephant was very well received, and they tell me that on the day when
he entered Meaco (where the court of Japon resides), the concourse of
people in the plaza was so great--because they had never seen elephants
before--that seven persons were suffocated. When the ambassador had
ascended to the hall, the king came out to meet him with thirty kings
who were his vassals. My letter, a copy of which was sent to your
Majesty last year, was then read in public. It was well received,
and the king said that he would reply thereto. Then he wished to see
the present which had been put in twelve boxes. Greatly excited and
enraged by a picture of myself, which represented me armed and with a
cane in my hand, he asked in a loud voice whether this were intended
as a threat. He was answered in the negative, but that it was a custom
of persons who held high offices to send their portraits as tokens of
regard and friendship when embassies were despatched. Thereupon he
was appeased, and ordered the picture to be placed in a large hall,
and directed his wives and children to go to see it. After this the
ambassador was invited to dine with him three times, and was finally
dismissed with a present of twelve coats of mail, thirty lances,
and two horses. The despatch has not yet arrived, but I fear that the
ambassador has died, for he was very ill at Nangasaque. The information
which I give your Majesty was gained from a letter of his. [20]

In compliance with your Majesty's orders, and after investigating the
embarrassments of the royal treasury, I have cashiered two companies
commanded by two of my relatives, thereby saving expenses to the
treasury of more than two thousand pesos a year; but if you consider
it best for your Majesty's service to extend the reduction somewhat,
it shall be done.

Within this city I have made an impregnable refuge, which is bounded
on one side by the sea and on another by the river; while on the
land side one thousand armed men can, if sufficiently provisioned,
defend it against one hundred thousand. I am uneasy, however, because
Nueva España neglects this important post. The troops sent me from
that country are useless, and the majority of them are unarmed. The
captains deprive the soldiers of their wages, and I have a hundred
such complaints. I have sent advices of everything to the Conde
de Monterrey, [21] in order that he may correct this evil, for the
reparation thereof belongs to him. Your Majesty's service will be
furthered by giving orders to this effect.

I beseech your Majesty to order that, for the use of the troops
of this camp, eight hundred arquebuses, four hundred muskets, and
three hundred coats of mail be brought from Spain; for the troops
are unarmed and your Majesty is put to much useless expense. I should
wish never to have been born if, on any occasion, this kingdom could
not be defended for your Majesty, for lack of arms.

I have found here an invention of the Sangleys for founding
artillery. It is easy of accomplishment, and as there is much metal
in the royal warehouses I am having fifty pieces of artillery made,
which will take a ball of one to three libras' weight, the size
most needed here. After these are finished, I shall not fail to go
to China to attack the Sangleys. May our Lord preserve the royal
Catholic person of your Majesty as is needed by these kingdoms,
and as we your vassals desire. Manila, June 17, 1598.

_Don Francisco Tello_

Sire:

Your Majesty's royal instructions despatched in the year ninety-six
were received in the month of May of the year ninety-eight. Your
Majesty's commands will be fulfilled with all punctuality, in each
and every respect; and the viceroy of Nueva España will be advised of
what concerns him, in order that he may also observe your Majesty's
commands. It is best for the service of your Majesty that the viceroy
should punctually send the reënforcements supplied to this kingdom,
and carefully attend to all other things pertaining thereto. I am
very sorry to see the manner in which your Majesty's revenues are
being wasted, and with so small a result; for the troops are in a
wretched condition and without arms, and the captains try rather
to rob them of their money than to secure good and serviceable
troops. They are striving to deprive this last contingent, who are
poor and unprotected, of the greater part of their pay. Owing to a
misunderstanding, the viceroy also does something unsuitable to your
Majesty's service--namely, he sends freight on certain ships which are
despatched to these regions by private persons. To avoid expense to
the royal exchequer, he makes entry thereof, and gives them license to
carry a large sum of money. [22] From investing this they secure four
times its value in goods; and all this wealth they use, and lade on
their ships, and they take away the cream of the trade from those who
were born in this country. As a result, this land is poor, harassed,
and wretched; and the Peruvians and Mexicans are rich and powerful,
for it is they who are engaged in this traffic. By the methods above
described, there can be no obstacle which prevents them from receiving
the highest profits. Your Majesty will command orders to be given in
this matter as is most beneficial.

The troops of this land, old and deserving soldiers, are in great need,
for the encomiendas are in rebellion, and they cannot be pacified
in many years. They are very poor, and beset with afflictions; and
it grieves me to be unable to assist them. Although I have supplied
several with temporary positions, I have been careful not to give
them to any follower or relative of mine. There are many who are
unfortunate, and the thousand pesos which your Majesty was pleased
to command to be granted every year, with the condition that the
additional pay given from it should not exceed ten pesos annually,
is not used for that purpose. This is because there is no one to take
the money, for it yields but seven reals a month, which can do no more
than buy food for one day. The provisions in this land are as dear as
those in Castilla. If your Majesty were pleased to have these thousand
pesos and another thousand--which can be obtained from charges laid
upon the vacant encomiendas--divided by the governor among twenty or
thirty unemployed captains and deserving soldiers, they would then be
enabled to buy food; and many very great excesses committed by them
in trying to obtain food among the Indians would be avoided. As these
are caused by their extreme necessity, they are to a certain extent
excusable, for no one is willing to be left to die of starvation. This
point is worthy of much consideration. I entreat your Majesty to have
the goodness to examine it and provide what is most needful.

Although by right of my office I can proceed to punish the captains
and soldiers of the land, and do so, there are, mingled with the
good men, so many who are vile and vicious that the majority of
the men are constantly informing on one another. This vice, as
well as that of writing defamatory libels and letters, is very
prevalent. This is a state of affairs very unfortunate for this
land, and one by which our lord is very ill served; and great and
serious misfortunes follow. If your Majesty were pleased to charge
each of the auditors here, in turn, privately to investigate these
cases and give the offenders exemplary punishment, a great part of
the present difficulty might be remedied. I assure your Majesty,
that one of the things which make me most dissatisfied and anxious
to leave the country, is the matter above stated. Therefore I have
petitioned your Majesty to grant me favor and license for it, as I
hope for it from your royal clemency. Many times I have considered
and been brought face to face with the great evil that is done in
this land by the marriage of elderly widows with whomsoever they may
choose. They are old and but ordinary women, as they were those who
first came here. Their husbands pacified the best encomiendas, and
died; and these widows are left with five or six thousand pesos of
income. They marry and have married despicably and irregularly, and
old soldiers, honorable gentlemen, and noblemen have been defrauded,
who by their descent would have inherited and succeeded to these
encomiendas. I have thought of a plan suitable to correct this evil,
about which I have conferred with grave religious persons--namely,
that the childless widow who shall marry after the age of forty years
shall hold but a life-interest in the encomienda. Will your Majesty
have this considered and provide accordingly, considering the extreme
importance of it.

Your Majesty's treasury is greatly embarrassed, as I have noted in the
letter pertaining to the royal finances. It occurs to me to declare
here what may be done in this regard, should it appear best to your
Majesty. The Chinese who come here to trade every year bring eight
hundred thousand pesos and sometimes more than a million. During the
ten days they spend here they gain more than a hundred per cent; and
this year, according to the universal opinion, fully two hundred per
cent. They find plenty of money and sell as they would in their own
land. Each outgoing ship pays as anchorage five hundred pesos and
the duties that are paid to your Majesty are only three per cent,
as imposed by Don Juan Rronquillo. If your Majesty would increase
the duties by another three per cent, it would not hurt them to pay
that amount, and your Majesty's royal treasury would receive much
relief thereby. The goods brought by these heathen Chinese are silks
of little cost and value, the scum of what they have; and they take
back in return gold and silver.

I humbly beseech your Majesty in respect to this point, as to all
my other suggestions, to accept so much as may be best for the royal
service, which my zeal but desires to further. May our Lord preserve
your Majesty for many long years, as we your Majesty's servants and
vassals need. Manila, June 19, 1598.

_Don Francisco Tello_

Sire:

The report which by your royal instructions your Majesty commands me
to send, as to the religious orders in these islands, the number of
houses and religious that they contain, and the number needed--whom
may your Majesty order to be sent, so that there may be sufficient
religious instruction in the islands--will accompany this letter. It
is sent with the promptness commanded by your Majesty, whose Catholic
and royal person may our Lord preserve, as is necessary to Christendom,
and as we your vassals desire. Manila, July 9, 1598.

_Don Francisco Tello_

[_Endorsed_: "Manila. To his Majesty, 1598. Don Francisco Tello. July
9."]

[_Instructions of the council_: "Have the superiors of the
religious orders of España notified to send useful religious to the
Philipinas. Let the viceroy of Nueva España be directed by letter
that he shall assemble the superiors of those religious orders, shall
confer with them in regard to the annual selection and despatch of
religious who are fitted to engage in this conversion, and shall
direct them in the matter. Let a letter be sent to the archbishop
of Manila asking for definite information as to the houses there,
how they are distributed, how many religious are in each one, and how
many would be needed in order to provide the necessary instruction;
and let him be directed to see that there is no lack, but that the
conversion shall continue to increase."]

_Report of the religious orders in these Philippinas Islands, of
their provinces and houses, and of the religious whom they have and
those whom they need from España,in order that there may be sufficient
religious instruction in the islands._

_St. Augustine_.--The Order of St. Augustine, the first order to be
founded in these islands, has occupied the provinces of Tagalos,
Pampanga, Ylocos, and Pintados. It has in them sixty houses,
with one hundred and eight priests and preachers, and fifty-three
lay-brethren. They must establish more houses, both for the entries
into new regions, and the new explorations which are to be made;
and for the provision of sufficient instruction. To this end it will
be necessary to send annually twenty religious to the order. These
should come from Nueva España, where there are many religious. It
would be at very much less cost to the royal exchequer to do this,
and most sufficient for this country, because they have already made
a beginning with the Indians.

_St. Francis_.--The Order of St. Francis has occupied the province
of Camarines, where it has forty houses, with one hundred and twenty
religious, twenty-three of whom are lay-brethren, and the rest priests,
preachers, and confessors. They need fifty religious, both that they
may have sufficient instruction, and for the houses that they are
to establish.

_St. Dominic_.--The Order of St. Dominic occupies the province of
Cagayan, where it has twelve houses, with seventy-one religious. For
the houses which they are to establish in that province, and that
the province may have sufficient instruction, they must have twenty
priests sent to them annually; for they receive as many lay-brethren
in the islands as they need.

_The Society of Jesus_.--The Society of Jesus, which is the last
established, has twelve houses, which lie in the provinces of
Pintados, and in the islands of Camar, Leite, and Babao. They have
in them forty-three religious, of whom twenty-three are priests,
preachers, and confessors, and the rest lay-brethren. For the houses
that they are to establish, and in Mindanao, where these religious
will have charge of the pacification, they will need fifty priests
at one time, and annual help henceforth; for they are reaping a great
harvest in this country. They have two colleges here, one in Manila,
and the other in the city of Santissimo Nombre de Jesus, where Latin
is taught to the Spaniards, and the Christian faith to the natives,
who manifest a deep interest.

The superiors of these orders are religious of much ability, and
among the other members of the orders are many excellent linguists,
who are accomplishing much in the conversion of the natives, which
continues to increase daily.





Report of the Audiencia on the Conduct of Tello


Sire:

Among other things which seemed advantageous to your Majesty's service
was for this Audiencia to govern in accordance with the instructions
and orders your Majesty gave us, and to request the president,
Don Francisco Tello, to observe them on his part. We have notified
him in writing that it is your Majesty's will that he shall use the
seal of your Majesty's arms only to seal the decrees made and issued
by the president and auditor of this chancilleria. We have notified
him that he is not to use it, as he does, in issuing commissions for
civil and military appointments. We have told him that your Majesty
has granted this privilege, under special decree, to the viceroys
alone. But he does not refrain from doing this, as we have reported
to your Majesty in a special letter of the first of this month.

We requested him, also, to wear suitable apparel in the judicial
sessions of the Audiencia, since hitherto he has come in wearing a
short cloak, and a hat with colored plumes. We asked him to wear the
same suitable apparel in conducting the deliberations of the Audiencia,
and in the building and council-room and court of the Audiencia. Up
to this time, when the aforesaid president has held the courts,
he has done so outside of the building of the Audiencia, and in a
chamber of the inn where he ordinarily resides. On these occasions
he has not been properly attired, appearing sometimes with a colored
cloak and sometimes without any.

It is urged upon the president also that when the deliberations
are being held, the door shall be bolted, that he shall allow no
one to enter, shall keep secret all deliberations, and shall cause
to be observed the respect and dignity due to this place where your
Majesty's person is represented--which he has thus far not done with
the requisite propriety and exactness. From this have resulted several
disagreeable occurrences.

But especially has the president been informed that, since your Majesty
has resumed the civil and criminal jurisdiction of these islands in
the Audiencia, so that he [the governor] may be less occupied and
more free to attend to matters of state and of war, he should not
take charge of imprisonments and suits against the inhabitants and
natives of this city. They complain that very often he persecutes them
severely for some grudge, or because he does not like them; and that,
even when he arrests them, he does not try their cases, and neither
condemns nor acquits the accused; nor does he refer the cases to the
Audiencia, so that they may be tried there, in accordance with the
demands of justice therein. Of all these cases, he has the right to
retain jurisdiction only over the offenses of the soldiers. These
he may try directly, as your Majesty has granted to him, as being
captain-general. We have had some conferences on these points with
the aforesaid president, and have used other means to induce him
to do right, and not transgress your Majesty's will. We have not,
however, found him entirely submissive to it, especially as to the
requirement to cease proceeding entirely alone in whatever suit he
chooses. In this way he has begun to persecute those who are not
entirely to his liking, and often with little justification. Because
it is very important to your Majesty's service, and to the welfare
of those who live here that this should not go on, we shall continue
the necessary precautions, so that without giving occasion on our part
for a break or disagreement with the president, he shall be submissive
to what your Majesty has decreed, as you desire. The important thing
is to report to your Majesty the state of affairs here, so that you
may provide definitely for what is to be done. We state truthfully
that we are under obligations to your Majesty to interfere in no
manner with the exercise of his governing power, and that of waging
war--unless, under title and pretext of his office as captain-general,
he shall prosecute and harass for his own personal grudges, and for
objects which are not for your Majesty's service, the inhabitants,
and those who are not soldiers, and have committed no offense, since
this must not go unremedied. Whatever your Majesty may be pleased
to decree in all this matter, we shall remain without anxiety and
in peace; for our only aim is the fulfilling of your Majesty's will,
and our desire the satisfactory accomplishment of the affairs of your
Majesty's service. May God keep your Majesty. Manila, July 15, 1598.

Doctor _Antonio de Morga_

The licentiate _Tellez Almaçan_

The licentiate _Alvaro Canbrano_





Documents of 1599



    Letter to the archbishop of Manila. Felipe III; March 1.
    Letter from the bishop of Nueva Segovia to the king. Miguel de
    Benavides; May 17.
    Letter to Joan de Ibarra. Miguel de Benavides; May 22.
    Missions of the religious orders. Geronimo de Alcaraz; June 28.
    Military affairs in the islands. Francisco Tello, and others;
    July 12.
    Letter to the king. Francisco Tello; July 12.
    Ordinances enacted by the Audiencia of Manila. Francisco Tello,
    and others; June 1598-July, 1599. (_To be concluded_.)



_Source_: All of these documents arc obtained from original MSS. in
the Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla.

_Translations_: The first, third, fourth, and sixth are translated
by Robert W. Haight; the second, by José M. and Clara M, Asensio;
the fifth and seventh, by Arthur B. Myrick, of Harvard University.





Letter from Felipe III to the Archbishop of Manila


The King: To the very reverend father in Christ, the archbishop of the
city of Manila, of the Philipinas Islands, a member of my Council. As
the information of which a copy is sent you with this has been examined
in my Council of the Indias, which inquiry was made by the order of
the governor of that archbishopric, concerning certain excesses of
the teaching religious of the Order of St. Augustine in those islands,
I have decided to send it to you; so that, in so far as concerns your
jurisdiction over the occupations of the priests in the missions,
you may correct the excesses mentioned in the said information,
and whatever others there may be. You will remedy them in the form
which most furthers the service of God our Lord, and myself. As to
the other matters contained in the said information concerning the
said religious--that it is understood that they are in league with
the governor of those islands and the provincial of the said Order
of St. Augustine, or he who may be in his place--you will discuss the
remedy which is made necessary by events, as well in this particular
as in general. Accordingly I charge and command you to do this,
and to advise me of what you shall have done therein. Valencia,
on the first of March, of 1599.

_I The King_

Countersigned by _Joan de Ybarra_

Signed by the Council.




Letter from the Bishop of Nueva Segovia to the King


I have no doubt that by other ways your Majesty [23] will learn of
the affairs of Manila. Even to seek correction for them I would be
unwilling to recall them to mind, were I not obliged to do so by the
service of God and the welfare of my afflicted fellow men. With the
fidelity which I owe to your Majesty, I must proclaim aloud before God
and your Majesty everything in Manila outside of the monasteries, and
declare what thing or what person is offensive to God, to your Majesty,
and to his fellow man. God is severely punishing that city by poverty
and losses of property. Such is the chastisement in spiritual affairs,
that, after so many years had passed without a prelate or father to
sympathize with and help the people, the archbishop who came last
year fell into a profound melancholy; and when he had been here two
months and a half God called him to Himself. He was removed from many
misfortunes which could not be relieved; and before he had preached
a single time, or given one call to his flock, the Lord took him. It
was said, however, that he died of a poisonous herb which was given
him; and they say that his symptoms proved it. Whether that is true
or not, this land is such that it could be suspected and said that in
so short a time they took the life of their prelate. In the temporal
government, the death of the good licentiate, Alvaro de Çambrano, was
very unfortunate for the poor and for persons of little influence. He
was a pious man and one of noble purposes, and he died of grief, as may
be deduced from a letter which he wrote me before his death. There is
no doubt that the reason we do not die is because we have not grieved
over matters with the charity and good zeal which were his.

Something has been done by the governor of these islands, Don Francisco
Tello, in which the auditors also must have been concerned. A ship was
sent from these islands to China, and, as I understand--your Majesty
will learn the facts by other means--it sailed to a port very near to
the town of the Portuguese. If God and your Majesty provide no remedy,
this expedition will be the total destruction of what is held here by
the crowns of Castilla and Portogal, with great offense to the faith,
or the destruction of preaching and conversion. It is most difficult
of correction, for there are interested in this matter first, the
governor; secondly, the auditors; and thirdly, their followers and
ministers. I hope, God helping, that all the good works which have
been commenced here will not be abandoned for aught but the interest
and profit of those who, according to right, should not regard their
private welfare, but the common good, and the service of God and their
king. In this I do not refer to the present auditors and governor, for
I do not know what they have done of good or of bad in this despatch to
China, but I speak of what is their custom and what is infallibly done
by governors and auditors, unless they are people very much devoted
to God's service. There are few if any persons that come who do not
destroy this land, by sending much money to China. Of this there is
no doubt, and every day more light is shed upon the subject. From
this vessel sent to China is resulting the total destruction of the
Portuguese town called Macan. Its sole support consists of the trade
carried on there with the Chinese, exporting goods thence to Japon and
elsewhere. By means of the friendly relations between the Portuguese
and the Chinese, they succeed in buying the stuffs very cheaply, and
by the little which is afterward gained in Japon and other places,
these people are supported. Even should we go there, we have not that
success in business, that concord among ourselves, or that patience
and phlegm, and we seek greater profits. Necessarily, we must greatly
increase the price of the goods--more especially as the Chinese are
very shrewd traders; and on seeing our ship there laden with money,
and knowing that it could not return empty, they may raise the prices
at their pleasure. As the profits of the Portuguese are not so great
that they can afford to suffer this, they must therefore give up that
trade, and abandon that town, which has no other means of support,
thus leaving the Christian Chinese to return to their idolatries and
mingle again with the heathen.

From this great and evident wrong, follow others even greater;
for whatever of Christianity there is in Japon, and the beginning
which your Majesty has there is supported solely by the traffic of
the Portuguese of Macan with Japon. When Macan is lost, Japon is
destroyed. The other parts of India which have traffic in Chinese
goods, and in goods which are carried to España--such as porcelains,
silks, and chests--must lose very materially. The royal income of
your Majesty must be greatly diminished, because all the duties from
Chinese merchandise are collected in India. Then in conveying them to
Portogal and from thence to Castilla you must also lose, for all these
affairs are moved by but one wheel, namely, Macan. Not the slightest
doubt can be entertained of the destruction of Macan, if ships from
the Philipinas go to that port or to any other of China, unless it be
very far away from Macan. Even in the latter case, Macan must receive
serious damage. It will also be necessary for the Portuguese to fit
out ships and try to capture what vessel or vessels go there from
the Philipinas. That there will be war between us is not doubtful,
but certain.

If the Portuguese must receive these serious damages, greater injuries
must be suffered by the Philipinas and the unfortunate Castilians
who have settled them, sustained them with their blood, maintained
in them the faith of Jesus Christ, and fulfilled their duty to your
Majesty by means of the continual labors of themselves and their
descendants. If this is continued, the governor, the auditors, and
their followers will send their property to China, and have the ship
brought back full of merchandise for themselves alone; and consequently
will supply the cargoes for the ships which sail hence to Mexico. Thus
the poor vassals of your Majesty, who have nothing whereby to support
themselves or their poor children except in this traffic with Mexico,
must be left like poor Indians, only because the devilish avarice
of those persons sent by your Majesty to govern and care for this
land leads them to take for themselves all the profits thereof. At
present--with much honor to your Majesty's royal crown and to the
Spanish nation--the Chinese come with their goods to the Philipinas,
and each Spaniard may buy and export goods; although even of this
traffic, it is said commonly that there is nothing to be expected
except thunderbolts from heaven to punish what is done, if report
be true. But at last shame must check these injustices sometime,
and not permit them to be done so openly. But if vessels are sent
from here to China, the Chinese merchants will not come here, nor
will goods from China be brought here; and should such goods come,
the governor and auditors will export their own goods, depriving of
space those to whom all the exportation is granted, according to the
just and holy will of your Majesty.

Even were it only for the sake of not seeing the Spanish nation so
defamed as it must be in China, and hated and scorned in these regions
even by the school-children, the governor and auditors should not be
willing to enter into a traffic so costly to the honor and reputation
of our nation. Here we have no large armies to sustain us, nothing
but reputation alone, and if they treat us as avaricious persons,
there will not be an Indian who will not be insolent to the Spaniards
on account of this, and more in proportion as we are always blinded
by avarice. What must be lost by the holy gospel and the Christian
law is evident; for sailors and soldiers will go hence in the ship--an
ungodly people, guilty of sins of the flesh as well as other offenses,
who know naught except to commit offenses against those with whom
they deal. Moreover, the heathen cannot receive a very good example
from the wars and enmity which will exist between the Castilians and
the Portuguese. The Chinese who come here to Manila have some poor
examples; but they also receive very good lessons from the religious,
and in the churches, the holy ceremonies of the church, and in the
life of several very good Spaniards, and even of some Indians. But
when the ship of the governor and auditors, or any others, is sent
there, the Chinese can have but the examples of soldiers, sailors,
and impious people.

God knows what the import and export duties and incomes of your
Majesty would profit and gain by the bringing of goods from China and
exporting them to Nueva España, because everything has to pass through
the hands of avarice, and of ministers who can do as they please here.

I do not know what can have been the reason for sending this ship to
China and beginning an enterprise so prejudicial. In a general clause,
however, of an instruction to the governor, your Majesty ordains that
the governor may send to Japon, Macan, or other pagan countries, also
to ports of the heathen and of the Portuguese in order to ascertain
if they would like trade with us. But China is not mentioned by name
in said clause; and the law of justice is that what is not conceded in
particular is not understood to be granted in a general statement. The
point under discussion was not only not particularly conceded by your
Majesty, but had been expressly prohibited by a special decree. Not
only did your Majesty ordain that no ship whatever should go from other
Spanish possessions to China, but it is even decreed that the Chinese
merchants coming here shall not take back Spanish money to China;
and that merchandise shall not be exported from China on account of
the Spaniards, but on account of the Chinese themselves. Even in the
same instruction, in the two clauses immediately preceding the one
to which I refer, your Majesty commands a thing incompatible with
the sending of a vessel to China, which has been undertaken this
year. Your Majesty decrees that all the goods coming from China
should be sold at the pancada and that nothing should be bought on
private account until after the pancada. The aforesaid decree would
be futile if license were then to be given to send money to China,
and also ships, to buy there the stuffs and merchandise for the
Spaniards. It may be that there are those who represent that this
has been done for the sake of opening a door to the evangelization
of China; but such persons do not have as a profession the preaching
of the gospel. The evident truth is what I state.

The sole correction for these evils, and for all the misfortunes of
this land, is for your Majesty to send--besides a holy and learned
archbishop, zealous in honoring God, your Majesty, and the common
welfare--a disinterested and God-fearing governor, such as Don Luis
Perez Dasmariñas, and, according to my information, Don Pedro Brabo
de Acuña, who has been governor for some years in Cartagena in the
Indias. But I understand that, at the receipt of these letters and
other things, your Majesty will have ordered Don Francisco Tello to
return [to España] and another governor will be provided. May God have
granted light to your Majesty, and continue to give you light always,
in order that your Majesty may be guided aright in a government so
far away from the royal eyes as this, where the governors have so
many opportunities to cause the destruction of the poor vassals of
your Majesty. Tulac, May 17, 1599.

_Fray Miguel de Benavides_,

Bishop of Nueva Segovia.




Letter from Bishop Benavides to Joan de Ibarra


May it please our Lord that this letter shall find your Grace and
Señora Doña Catalina and your children enjoying all the grace of God
and the health and contentment that I wish them, and which I every day
beseech for them in my poor masses and prayers. I cannot write now in
regard to the news which should come this year, because I am far from
Manila, and the ships depart hence for Mexico when those from Mexico
come, and sometimes earlier. I am writing what has occurred here to
the Council, and as one who knows your Grace's zeal, I have no need to
urge the necessity here of having a man come as governor who is known
to fear God. Oh, my lord secretary, if your Grace could see some of
this, and if I could cause the eyes of those lords to perceive the
need of this unfortunate country, and the mighty things which depend
on it, for the glory of God and the faith, and for the honor of the
crown of Castilla! The king cannot settle a matter of such importance
in the Yndias--and certainly I shall not err in expatiating upon
it. There is need here of a man so moderate and disinterested, and
so staunch a friend of the general weal--and in a word, so fearful
of God and His judgment--as is fitting for the government of the
Philipinas. But, as I say, by his discretion in matters concerning
his Majesty, and his zeal for the service of God and the king, there
is one who is qualified for it--that is, Don Luis Perez Das Mariñas;
for it is necessary that the governor of this country be even more
a preacher of the faith of Jesus Christ our Lord, and of His law,
than are the preachers themselves. His life is an example of effort
to conciliate to Christianity, or to keep at a distance the Chinese,
Japanese, Sianese, Cambojans, and numberless other nations whom God
has placed here. I have heard much good of Don Pedro Bravo de Acuña,
formerly governor of Cartagena; and it seems to me that he, too, would
be very fit for this country. Gomez Perez Dasmariñas brought with
him a nephew named Don Fernando de Castro, of as good family as was
his uncle, or even better. I have often conversed with him, and know
much about him that is good. I know that he is a very moderate man,
and has much fear of God; and he is well inclined to take advice when
occasion arises. These islands and the king's exchequer would also
gain much if this man were governor. He likewise has much experience
on these lands and seas, as he has been several times commander on
the voyage to Mexico, and went to China on the occasion of the death
of his uncle, Gomez Perez.

I do not care to write concerning Don Francisco Tello, as when this
arrives another will already have been appointed, and he will go to
his home; may God guide him, and give him good fortune and penitence
for his misdeeds. What I write concerning the great evil of having a
ship go to China from these islands to trade--at any rate near where
the Portuguese are, and even in all parts of China--is at present so
true that, if this evil be not remedied, these islands must be ruined,
and the Portuguese will be destroyed. The Catholic faith must lose
much; and I hold it certain that there will be a war between us and
the Portuguese, for they have sought to take up arms with less cause
than this, or even have taken them up, against the Castilians there
in Macan. In short, they will not allow themselves to be ruined, and
that so evidently for merely the interest of the Castilians; but it
is not for the interest of the Castilians, but that of the governor
and auditors, and their retainers. The Portuguese know well, and so
do we all, that this is not the will of the king nor of the Council.

I write also that it is necessary to correct the freedom, ignorance,
and boldness of certain religious. I am still of the opinion which
we all had at that time, that the brief which Father Alonso Sanchez
secured from Gregory XIV, giving the bishop power to make visitations,
in person or by any clergyman, of the religious and their mission
villages, is certainly a most damaging one. Although no doubt some
superiors of the religious orders deserve to have this put in execution
at times, yet the religious orders are the walls of the church, and it
is not well to treat them thus. But likewise it is necessary that the
pope establish some order in the irregularity which your Grace will see
described in my letter for the Council. Let the bishop keep his place,
and the religious theirs; and let this divine work of preaching the
gospel be continued, which is our greatest desire. If the captain of
infantry tries to take up the duties of the master-of-camp, and the
soldier those of the captain or of the general, it will go ill with
the war. I am sending the Council the letter which I am writing to
the pope--first, because I wish that the Council should see first
what I have to say to the pope, that they should place it before
the pope, and that everything may be done by his order. In this way
everything will be regular, and, God willing, we shall achieve the
desired result. In the second place I have not and do not desire
any agent, because through the mercy of God, I solicit nothing for
my private interests, but only for the service of God and that of my
king. It seems to me sufficient to write what I think, to the Council,
so that those lords may attend to it, since that is their affair;
and they and their consciences will be excellent solicitors for the
adjustment of the matters that I write about, and the zeal of your
Grace will make up for my shortcomings and remedy matters here,
for I promise you there are many.

Concerning myself I may say that I am well, thanks to God. Those
who manage the royal exchequer have treated me according to my
deserts. It is impossible for me to live unless this be remedied,
for in this misery which has been decreed for me, they have through
a whole year accorded me no more than one third, amounting to
six hundred and some odd pesos of eight reals. The expense which
I undergo is excessive, although I brought with me only one boy,
and at most two persons. I have not even anyone to help me at mass,
although in so new and unsettled a country. I am forced to go from one
part to another; and, as there are no beasts of burden and everything
has to be borne on men's shoulders, even if one is only bringing the
articles necessary to say mass, it costs a great deal of money. I am
in such a condition that I have not even a chasuble in which to say
the ordinary mass. I have even worn shoes with holes, which showed
the bare flesh, and perhaps there was nothing with which to buy
others. I do not ask for more income; I only ask that the decree of
his Majesty be obeyed in my behalf--that instruction shall be paid
for in the same place with the tributes from that place. I would be
satisfied if only that which was ordered to be given me were paid
me in my bishopric, from the tributes and the treasury thereof, in
the province of Ilocos; for that of Cagaian has nothing, and there
are no established tributes there. For if the money goes to Manila,
as the governor and auditors and royal officials are there, I too
must go there; and it certainly is an indignity to the position of a
bishop that they should thus treat him. What is done for a lay priest
and a religious is not much to do for a bishop; and as the religious
and the secular clergymen are paid where they labor and where the pay
is needed, the bishop should also be paid where he labors and where
he needs it. Beside this, as he is obliged to go there and return,
he undergoes during the journey (which is on the king's account)
danger from sea and from many enemies on land; and on the return,
which is on my account, there are the same dangers and risks to be run,
and I must pay money to bring it from a great distance, and through
dangerous routes. All this would be obviated if only the said decree
of his Majesty were observed in my case. But, as they say in Castilla,
the gallows was made for the unfortunate.

There is some more money which the royal officials have not collected
from me, which I owed, although they were informed of it by the
bulls. They failed to collect from me other money--that which was lent
me in España in the House of Trade at Sevilla, for my aid and outfit. I
say that concerning this I am writing to the Council, asking them to
remit me this debt, as it is certainly necessary. If those lords should
consent to have this favor done me, well and good; if not, patience.

Although I have equal liking and respect for all the Council, as for
Señor the licentiate Molina de Medrano, he best knows my heart and my
soul, as he has had closer association with me. Although I am writing
to his Grace, yet I do not know whether that letter will be so long;
and accordingly I beg your Grace to communicate this to him. To Señora
Doña Catalina, and to Señors Don Francisco and Don Christoval, and to
Doña Magdalena, and to that other angelic child whose name I do not
recall: may God keep them in life, and grant health to your Grace,
as I, the affectionate chaplain of all your household, desire. Afulu,
May 22, 1599.

_Fray Miguel_, Bishop of Nueba Segobia.

That letter I wrote to the Council, but it was blotted; and accordingly
I send a copy of it, and send that to your Grace, so that you may
show this if perchance the other one should be lost.

[_Endorsed_: "To Joan de Ibarra, knight of the habit of Calatrava,
of the royal Council of the Indias, and secretary of the king our
lord for the Indias."]




Missions of the Religious Orders


I, Geronimo de Alcaras, secretary of the chapter of this holy
metropolitan church of Manila, and notary-public of the ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, give witness and true testimony that, by the books
wherein are recorded the decrees and other matters having to do with
the government thereof, which are issued in this archbishopric, and
which books are in my possession, it appears that on the twenty-first
of August of the past year one thousand five hundred and eighty-seven,
Don Fray Domingo de Salasar, who was the first bishop of these
islands, gave permission and license to the religious of the Order
of St. Dominic to found a church and convent in this said city of
Manila. Likewise on the twenty-ninth of August of the year one thousand
five hundred and ninety, the said bishop gave the said permission to
the religious of the Order of St. Augustine to establish missions in
the tingues of Pas, the encomienda of Tome de la Ysla. [24] On the
same day he also gave permission for the villages of Araya and Pinpin,
of the jurisdiction of Candava. Likewise on the third day of the month
of February of the year one thousand five hundred and ninety-five,
Fray Christoval de Salvatierra, then director of this archbishopric,
gave the said permission to the religious of the Order of St. Francis
to establish a mission in the tingues of Cavite, on the encomienda of
Diego Jorge. On the twenty-fifth of September of the year one thousand
five hundred and ninety-six the dean and chapter of this said holy
church, _sede vacante_, gave the said permission to the religious of
the Society of Jesus, for the whole of the island of Mindanao. On
the twelfth of February of the year one thousand five hundred and
ninety-eight, the said dean and chapter gave the said permission to
the said religious of the Society of Jesus for the mission village
[_doctrina_] of Taytay. On the eighth of May of this present year of
ninety-nine, the said dean and chapter gave the said permission to
the said religious of the Society of Jesus for the village of Silan
in the tingues of Cavite, because the religious of St. Francis had
resigned that mission. Although I have examined with particular care
the said books, I find in none of them that there has been given thus
far permission for more houses than those above mentioned, all of
which appears and is evident by the said books to which I refer. That
this may be evident, at the command of the said dean and chapter I
give this present, dated at Manila, on the twenty-eighth day of the
month of June of the year one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine.

_Geronimo de Alcaraz_

The notaries who have below signed their names certify and bear
witness, to whomsoever may see the present paper, that Jeronimo de
Alcaras, by whom this report is signed in this other part, is secretary
of the chapter, acting as vicar-general, and is master of school and
licentiate, and as such entire faith and credit, in and out of court,
is given to the reports and other papers which have passed and shall
pass before him. That this may be apparent, we have given this present
in Manila, on the twenty-eighth of June of the year ninety-nine.

_Francisco de Olavide_, notary to his Majesty.

_Francisco de Valencia_, notary public.

_Joan Paz Dessotomayor_, notary royal.

[_Endorsed_: "Testimony regarding the occasions upon which the
ordinary of the Filipinas Islands has given his permission to the
mendicant religious to found churches and instruct the natives of
those islands."]




Military Affairs in the Islands


_That the Phelippinas Islands are far distant from España and Peru,
and in the midst of many enemies; and that they should be annually
supplied with men and arms._ [25]

I. Since these your Majesty's islands are very remote and distant from
Nueva España and Peru, and much farther from Castilla, and surrounded
by many large kingdoms inhabited by heathen, who are enemies of our
holy Catholic faith--as, for instance, China, Cochinchina, Camboxa,
Sian, Xapon, Maluco, and many others--to whom the Spanish name and
valor are odious and hateful, and who watch for any opportunity to
compass our injury and destruction, it is important to notice and
guard against any danger or suspicion which may threaten us. For,
by the entry to Manila which the Chinese and Japanese enjoy for
the purposes of trade, and their understandings with the natives,
it may be justly suspected that, allied with the natives of the
land, with whom they are very friendly, they may attempt some great
enterprise. The best defense against that lies in a large force of
Spanish troops. Although your Majesty takes such particular care to
send assistance every year, this camp not only does not continue to
increase, but even is not maintained: first, because the number of
men who come is not in proportion to those who die during the year,
since the land is [in]salubrious [26] and unhealthy, without reckoning
the men wasted in the ... on punitive expeditions, pacifications, and
ne[w dis]coveries w[hich o]ffer [themselves]; and further there is a
lack of ... since, almost at the same time, occurred the expedition
and pacification of Mindanao, the punishment and pacification
of the presidio of Cagaian, the reverse for the troops in Çebu,
the punishment of and raids among the Çambales, the presidio of La
Caldera, and the expedition to Camboxa. Also the voyage from Nueva
España wastes many men; because leave must necessarily be given to
those who are married in España or to Peruvians--who are men very
harmful to the commonwealth--besides others who did not come with
the intention of living in it, or the desire of becoming citizens,
but only to return with their property. In giving them leave, we
take into consideration that there is ... of those who leave here
rich ... few set their minds upon ... many to come ... voluntarily
without any expense to your royal treasury, so that we are always
in need of men. Those who remain here are exceedingly poor, so I beg
your Majesty to order the viceroy of Nueva España to attend to this
matter with the greatest punctuality. This year only seventy men came
here; they were not serviceable men and among them all there were
only three arquebuses. One thousand arquebuses, five hundred muskets
with powder-horns and small flasks, and five hundred coats-of-mail
and as many morions, should be sent to me from España, at prime cost,
to be distributed among the unarmed men; and those left over would be
stored in your Majesty's armory for future necessity, for at present
the soldiers are unprovided with arms.

[_In the margin_: "Have a letter written to the viceroy of Nueva
España, and this relation sent him  ... much that he provide with
care these ... useful, and endeavor to send settlers ...; and that
for this object he perform and execute what is order[ed] in regard
to the matter, with exactness and rigor, and aid in every way. Send
directions to Don Pedro de Acuña to communicate with the viceroy in
regard to the despatch there of all that pertains to the service of
this matter; and that they prepare what will be advisable, in order
to settle that country, taking care that the needful moderation be
exercised in incurring expenses for his Majesty's exchequer."]

_Two workmen are asked for to cast artillery, of which there is
considerable need._

II. A couple of artillery founders are very much needed here, because
of the artillery cast in the islands--sometimes by Indians, and
sometimes by Chinese--besides the great cost and delay, not even one
piece out of four turns out good, although there is plenty of material,
which I have caused to be collected with the greatest care. I beg your
Majesty to send me these masters because there is a great scarcity
of artillery for the defense and protection of this country.

[_In the margin_: "Endeavor to have these two founders sent; have
them sought carefully, and ask the captain-general for them."]

_That a master-builder is needed to repair defects in the wall and
the fortifications._

III. I beg your Majesty to have a master-builder sent me, because
the work on the wall of this city did not have the necessary finish
and foundation. In some places it has fallen. The fortifications were
not built with the plan and in the form necessary for their purpose.

[_In the margin_: "Have some suitable person found to send."]

_That no more assistance is asked from Nueva España than is necessary;
that the succor which has been ordered for this colony has been ill
attended to; that there are fears of the Japonese who came this year,
1599, to plunder these islands; and that a relation of the state of
Xapon is being sent_.

IIII. In a royal decree, your Majesty orders me not to ask from
here too much assistance of Nueva España, which shall be fulfilled
according to your Majesty's orders. I assure your Majesty that nothing
more than what is actually necessary is, or shall be, asked for from
here. Mexico is not in close accord with us, because, although your
Majesty has ordered that the customs and freights derived from the
Chinese trade be sent from that country for the payment and assistance
of this colony, it has not yet been done or observed. Now besides the
men to whom I am pledged in La Caldera for the second ... the island
of Mindanao and a check to ... the enemy in Terrenate from coming
to ... the Pintados, your Majesty's vassals ... year Japonese have
commenced to come ... almost within sight of Manila. Formerly not
more than two or three ships were in the habit of coming, but this
year seven piratical vessels appeared, who have done considerable
damage; and nine merchant-vessels, who have entered Manila within
four months. But, as it happened that the pirates came after them,
as we suspected that they were not all of the same understanding
and alliance, several investigations were made in regard to them,
and their commanders arrested, although nothing of importance was
found. I sent General Don Joan Ronquillo and Captain Joan de Alcega to
attack the enemy with a galley and a galliot; and although they came
within sight of them, they did not effect the desired purpose, because
their vessels were not suitable, and heavy storms were threatening. I
sent Captain Gaspar Perez to ... with some vireys and small ships;
he had better luck, for, having met with two of the Xaponese ships,
he overcame the one which awaited him, and killed the whole crew. He
brought one Xaponese of this city here alive, who was executed in the
sight of the Xaponese and Chinese. I also sent Captain Christoval de
Azqueta with what ships were suitable. The enemy did not wait, but
fled. I am quite certain that they will return the coming year with
a large number of ships, and a large force of men, on account of the
booty which they found aboard a Chinese trading-vessel that they seized
on the high sea, and some robberies committed on the native Indians.

With the death of Taico Samar, the lord of all Xapon, the state of some
affairs may be changed, but not the government--for this, they say,
is well conducted. Although I have not declared him who governs an
enemy, there is little to hope for in this affair of Xapon, because
about one hundred thousand men, Xaponese soldiers, who were employed
in the war with Corea, have returned to their own country, who are
now idle and poor. Some of them may try to invade this land, which is
so coveted by them on account of their thirst for gold. I have sent
letters to Xapon on the two trading-vessels, advising the Xaponese
of the arrival of the pirates, and requesting their punishment, and
the prevention of any ships from leaving Xapon without permission. I
also asked them not to send more than three Xaponese trading-vessels,
for they are quite enough to supply this community with flour. A
relation of the condition of Xapon accompanies this.

[_In the margin_: "Have the new governor directed to display
great care in meeting expenses which are to be disbursed from his
Majesty's treasury; to prevent any trouble which might arise from the
presence and residence of foreigners there, even under the pretense
of trading; that a welcome be extended to friends, and harmony with
them maintained; and that ports and frontiers have their necessary
defenses."]


_That on account of suspicions that the Chinese are bringing over
corsair pilots and seamen, the conduct of the governor of the Sangleys
in Manila was investigated._

V. On account of suspicions which arose a long time ago regarding the
Chinese, and because the Japanese pirates brought Chinese pilots and
seamen, I made some investigations ... Alonso Sauyo, governor of the
Sangleys, but nothing of importance was discovered. . . .

[_In the margin_: "No reply to this."]


_That, as the galleys are not suitable for these seas, because of
the tides, galizabras [27] are being built._

VI. After having considered and discussed in special meeting the fact
that galleys are not suitable for these seas--as may be seen by the
fact that they are not ships that can stand the heavy tides, or enter
the bays in pursuit of the enemy--and because of the difficulties
which the religious put in the way of enlisting rowers, and the lack
of skill among the latter--it was resolved to build four galizabras,
well supplied with artillery and manned with crews. Three galliots
in addition seems to be a large enough force to sweep this sea and
make it safe, so that the Chinese merchants can go and come from
their country with greater safety. These are being built in all haste.

[_In the margin_: "Have this entrusted to the new governor, so that
he may take the necessary precautions, and advise as to what should
be done and the cost of the undertaking."]


_That Gomez Perez had not manned more than three galleys._

VII. Although your Majesty has been informed that Gomez Perez had
manned more than eight galleys here, the report made to your Majesty
was false; for all that he did was to arm three or four galleys for
that expedition to Maluco, and the crew were a few blacks who were
brought at that time to him from the punishment and raids among the
Çambales, and the rest were Indian seamen taken by force, at the cost
of the encomenderos who accompanied him on the said expedition. The
principal galliot he manned with a crew of Chinese, who killed him.

[_In the margin_: "No reply to this."]


_That the island of Mindanao is pacified, and a garrison maintained
in La Caldera, and that report of the condition of the island is sent._

IX. [28] In regard to the pacification of Mindanao, the undertaking
has hitherto been carried on at the cost of the estate of Estevan
Rodriguez de Figueroa; but now a judgment has just been handed down
by this royal Audiencia against your Majesty, providing that it
shall be carried on at the cost of your royal treasury, since that
expedition was organized with prearrangement by your Majesty and
complete justification. The present condition of affairs there is
that Don Joan Ronquillo left the island, and it is now, in a state of
pacification, for the natives acknowledged your Majesty's rule. But,
because of the disposition of some of the chiefs, there is no security,
nor have they come to pay their tribute. It is not in the necessary
state of quiet and perfection, because, in order to attain that, it
is necessary to maintain a garrison there of two hundred soldiers,
whom I have not at the present time. The land produces but little,
nor is there any great quantity of gold, although considerable wax
and tortoise-shell is found. In some parts the people are poor, and
I understand will not be able to pay tribute. In order to insure
security for the Pintados, it is quite important that that island
be safe and secure, so that the natives of Terrenate may have no way
station there to rob the Pintados--who are your Majesty's vassals--as
was done in the year 95, when one thousand five hundred Indians were
captured. Considering that I lack men and force sufficient for the
said purpose, I have posted in La Caldera, which is near Mindanao,
one hundred Spaniards, under command of Captain Toribio de Miranda,
a good leader, by whom that quiet and blessing can be effected, and
Terrenate kept in check until, finding myself better supplied with
men here, it could be completely quieted. A report of the condition
of Mindanao will accompany this.

[_In the margin_: "Have the new governor directed to exercise great
care to maintain the pacified regions, and to have the gospel preached,
and in the ... in regard to the tributes to make necessary regulations,
after consultation with the prelates, and according to his orders;
and that he try to keep those who acknowledge his Majesty's dominion
secure from receiving any injury from their enemies, and forward
information of everything that is done."]


_That the province of Cagaian rebelled, but is now in greater peace
and security than at any time heretofore._

X. In the province of Cagaian, which is one of the best and most
fertile districts of the country, a rising among the Indians took place
last year (1598) caused by the bad treatment of the encomenderos
and collectors, and from the warlike nature of the natives of
that province. The place being of so great importance, I sent the
master-of-camp, Pedro de Chaves, with one hundred men to restore peace
and punish them. He subdued and pacified them. Immediately after this,
I sent Captain Diego de Chaves as alcalde-mayor to punish the Indians
who were the instigators of the said rising, and he executed twelve
of the headmen. Today the province is quiet, peaceful, and tractable
by land and sea, so that a single soldier may go through it alone;
while formerly it was necessary for ten or a dozen to go in company,
and even then there was little security.

[_In the margin_: "Have ... master-of-camp notified to go upon the
first occasion to fill his office."]


_That a relation of the expedition to Camboxa, and the state of that
kingdom, was sent last year (1598), and it is now sent again._

XI. In a letter dated November 15 of last year (1598), which I sent
your Majesty by way of Malaca, I gave your Majesty a detailed account
of the condition of the kingdom of Camboxa with these islands, and the
expedition which Captain Joan Joares Gallinato made to the country, by
order of Don Luis Perez Dasmariñas. I also told you that the same Don
Luis went to finish it in person at his own cost, with my concurrence
and agreement, and at the advice of the royal Audiencia. The relation
of the condition of that kingdom I sent to your Majesty with a copy of
the agreements. Don Luis having left prematurely, and the winds being
quite contrary, he made a harbor, and is now on the coast of China in
the harbor of Pinal, near Canton--crippled, and without ships, arms,
or munitions to continue his expedition. The admiral's ship of his
fleet was lost on some shoals on the coast of Chincheo, and a fine
crew of forty-five Spaniards were drowned. A galliot, which he also
had with him, arrived at Cagaian, where the crew received all good
provision. Repairs were made and the men supplied with what they
needed. The vessel set out on its voyage to Camboxa, before hearing
of the loss of Don Luis, and nothing else is known of it. Don Luis
is continually sending from there for assistance in ships, men,
arms, and munitions, of which there is a great scarcity. Although
he has endured so many hardships, and hunger, and nakedness, when
I consider on my side the straits in which I find myself, and the
little assistance that I have had from Nueva España this year for
the great dangers which confront us, and the number of affairs which
it is necessary to attend to and provide, not only do I not think of
sending him any help, but with the consent of the royal Audiencia,
I advised him to return here so that I could avail myself of the men
that he had there, for occasions which are expected in the future. He
was not strictly ordered, considering the expense to his own estate,
and the hardships which he has endured upon this expedition. When he
arrives at Camboxa he will see whether the king there is in great
need of his person and troops to defend him. After considering the
state of affairs there, Don Luis will do whatever is most necessary
for the service of God and your Majesty. [29]

[_In the margin_: "That everything necessary regarding Camboxa is
already attended to."]

_That, considering that there are poor citizens who have served well,
they should be given some support from the royal treasury, setting
aside for it, a fund of two thousand pesos, besides one thousand
pesos from saleable offices_.

XII. Considering the distress of the troops here, and how little there
is here for their support--and I assure your Majesty that this is an
expensive land, although in the midst of plenty--and as it was seen
that there are not enough encomiendas or offices for everyone, and that
some of your deserving citizens, not being rewarded, do not fill them,
it was the custom to give them false musters [_plazas muertas_], so
that these people secured a living. Your Majesty has ordered this to
be stopped, and this has been done. Also further, in regard to your
Majesty's order to divide one thousand pesos of additional pay among
the soldiers, there is no one who will accept anything, on account of
its being so small a sum, as ten pesos a year, and I do not dare to
exceed your Majesty's orders. I should be of the opinion that these
thousand pesos and as many more, amounting in all to two thousand
a year, should be distributed as a deferred allowance to old and
deserving men, who can serve no longer. One thousand pesos is good,
and may serve until another greater reward is given them. This may
be under the title of pay, up to one hundred pesos, or whatever your
Majesty may order. May God preserve your Majesty's Catholic person,
as is needful to these kingdoms, and as we your vassals desire. Manila,
July 12, 1599.

_Don Francisco Tello_

[_In the margin_: "Have the new governor give information of all this,
and meanwhile let everything provided be observed."]



Relation of Mindanao


After Gomez Perez Dasmariñas saw that the sect of Mahoma was
effecting an entrance into the island of Mindanao by way of Maluco,
and that through the proximity and association of the said island
with the province of the Pintados, this sect was sure to insinuate
itself into the said province and others of the Philipinas Islands,
he tried to remedy matters by giving the pacification of the island
to Captain Estevan Rodriguez de Figueroa, of which your Majesty
has been informed. He approved the said agreements, declaring what
should be given to Estevan Rodriguez de Figueroa as a reward for this
pacification. The said Captain Estevan Rodriguez de Figueroa left
these islands in the month of April, in the year five hundred and
ninety-five, with thirty-six ships, large and small, well supplied
with artillery, and with two hundred and twelve Spanish soldiers,
and one thousand five hundred Indians. On the twentieth of the said
month, he arrived at the river of Mindanao, where are the largest
settlements on the island, and where the king of the island resides. On
the twenty-fifth he went ashore, leaving the master-of-camp aboard the
vessels with a guard for the security of the fleet. Marching in the
direction of one of the enemy's forts, they came upon an ambuscade
in their path. Coming to a hand-to-hand conflict, Captain Estevan
Rodriguez de Figueroa was wounded in the head by a knife-thrust,
and died in two days without regaining consciousness. At this turn
of affairs the soldiers, who had disembarked, retired to their
ships without avenging his death. The captains and soldiers held
a council and appointed as their captain-general, Joan de Lajara,
master-of-camp of the said fleet, who disembarked with his men,
and built another fort four leagues below the enemy's fort, where
they remained several days without accomplishing anything. Finally,
in the month of October, the said Joan de Laxara came to this city,
saying that he had left the camp to come to ask for help for the
men whom he had left there, for they were in great distress. Don
Francisco Tello, governor and captain-general of these islands,
thought that the said Joan de Laxara had done wrong in deserting
his camp, when he was able to ask for help by means of letters, or
by means of some other person. He imprisoned him for several days,
and tried to find some one to take charge of it. Finding that the
children of Estevan Rodriguez de Figueroa were infants, the eldest
being four years old, and that the guardians could not take care
of affairs of such importance and trust with the punctuality and
readiness necessary, and aware of the danger encountered by the men
who remained in Mindanao, he called a council of war of the most
practiced and experienced captains in the land, to consider their
resources. They were of the opinion that the said pacification thus
commenced should not be abandoned, that those Indians who were acting
so shamelessly should be punished, and that the said pacification be
prosecuted at the cost of the estate of the said Estevan Rodriguez,
which was pledged for it. With the requisite promptness, the said
governor appointed Don Joan Ronquillo, general of the galleys, to
finish the said pacification, giving him a sufficient force of men
and war-material for the purpose. While he was preparing to make this
expedition, Captain Toribio de Miranda was despatched before him,
with news of the coming of Don Joan Ronquillo with assistance and a
sufficient force to bring the undertaking to an end; and to encourage
them by showing them how little hardship they still had to undergo,
and that they should by no means stir from their position. Although
this message was despatched with the greatest celerity, when he arrived
at the port of La Caldera in the said island, which is forty leagues
from the river of Mindanao, he met there the whole camp and fleet
of Mindanao, which was coming to this city, after having burnt their
fort. The said Captain Toribio de Miranda, with the orders which he
bore, detained them and made them return to the river of Mindanao,
where Don Joan Ronquillo arrived with his fleet and army after a few
days; upon disembarking, he began to bring about some good results. At
this time a fleet arrived from the neighboring Terrenate to help the
Mindanaos, who had sent there for assistance. These were eight hundred
men under the leadership of an uncle of the king of Terrenate, who
entered the river of Mindanao where the Spanish camp was pitched. At
a distance of two leagues from it he disembarked and built a fort
and cavalier, without being disturbed. When this was discovered by
the Spaniards, he was attacked by them by land and water at once,
on November 15. They besieged the enemy's fort and fleet, and not
only the whole fort but the fleet was won, with some artillery and
the loss of many men on the enemy's side, without the loss of any
Spaniards. In this encounter the general of the fleet from Terrenate
was killed. This victory was a very important one, and with it the
whole island of Mindanao lost courage and were awed. The island was
surrendered peacefully, and is peaceful today. They acknowledged
obedience to our sovereign, the king, whereupon the robberies and
injuries which the Terrenatans were accustomed to commit in the
provinces of the Pintados, who are your Majesty's vassals, have ceased.

Before these happy results, Don Juan Ronquillo wrote a letter to Don
Francisco Tello, governor of the Philipinas, in which he told how
far this conquest of Mindanao extended, and the distress of the camp
for lack of supplies, unless he were continually assisted from these
islands. For that island is quite lacking in them, and altogether
of little profit or substance to his Majesty, as it is a poor and
wretched land, lacking in everything; and, even when it is pacified,
the natives there would not be able to pay tribute, on account of its
great sterility. It would likewise be impossible to come to close
quarters with the Indians, because they never stand their ground,
and are able to inflict injury with safety to themselves, shooting
arrows from the heights at the Spanish camp without any possibility
of being attacked in return, because they flee immediately to the
mountains. When the said governor, Don Francisco Tello, heard this,
he called a council of war of the most practiced and experienced
captains in the land; and, having read the letter of the said Don
Joan Ronquillo, all were unanimous that, if the island of Mindanao
was so fruitless and profitless, and the pacification would have to
spread so far over it, the said Don Joan Ronquillo should be ordered
to have a last fight with the natives of the island, and do them all
the harm possible, without endangering the camp; and that, this done,
he should strike camp, and go with all his men to the island of La
Caldera. When he arrived there he was to build a fort, well supplied
with artillery and provisions. He was to leave in it a garrison of one
hundred men, in charge of a good leader, as a check for Terrenate and
Mindanao. With the rest of his force he was to return to these islands,
where, at this time, the province of Cagayan was in rebellion, whose
people are the most warlike of the island. They had grave suspicions
of Japon, and need of troops.

This order was sent immediately to Don Joan Ronquillo. When he
received it, he had had the good fortune above referred to. He ought
to have followed up such good luck and fortune, but failed to do so,
executing his orders immediately, without at all finishing the task
of calming the minds of several chiefs of the island, although he
left it pacified, and they had rendered obedience to and recognized
his Majesty.

Don Joan Ronquillo was also ordered to stop on his way back, at
the island of Jolo, which is twenty leagues from the harbor of La
Caldera. The king of Jolo rendered obedience to his Majesty many
years ago, and, although Jolo is an encomienda, he has paid no more of
the tribute than he pleased, having had but little intercourse with
Spaniards, and the island not having been thoroughly quieted. Don
Joan was to advise the king, and give him to understand the state of
affairs in the island of Mindanao; and order him, as it was pacified,
not to disturb it, warning him that he would be rigorously punished;
that since he had done homage so long ago, he should continue it; that
the Spaniards were settled on the island of La Caldera, whence they
could quickly come if any quarrels should arise; and that they would
maintain them in justice and defend them from their enemies. With this
order the said Don Joan Ronquillo, leaving the said island of Mindanao
in the condition above referred to and striking his camp, arrived,
with all his armament, at the island of La Caldera, where he built the
fort according to orders. Having mounted some artillery, and left a
garrison of one hundred soldiers, with Captain Christoval de Villagra
at the head of his men, well provided with supplies and munitions,
he went to Jolo, where he gave the king of that island to understand
what he was ordered. The king immediately rendered obedience again to
his Majesty. This done, the said Don Joan Ronquillo, with the rest
of his force, came to these islands, where investigations into his
conduct were made by the said governor, because he had not entirely
tamed the spirit of those chiefs, notwithstanding the orders which
were sent him to strike camp, since afterward he had had such good
fortune and an opportunity for it, had he remained--one fortnight
more being all that was required--and as nothing had been risked,
he could have done it.

Captain Christoval de Villagra, confident in the submission which the
king of Jolo had made to his Majesty, sent thirty soldiers to the said
island to look for supplies. When they arrived there they found there
an uncle of the king of Mindanao, a brother-in-law of the king of Jolo,
whom, because he was restless and rebellious, they banished from the
said island. He treacherously killed thirteen soldiers; notice of
this being brought to the governor, the latter immediately sent as
governor of the said fort of La Caldera, Captain Joan Pacho, a person
practiced and experienced in that land, to inflict punishment upon
Jolo. As soon as he had arrived at La Caldera, he began operations,
and left there for the said punitive expedition with sixty Spaniards,
with whom he engaged the enemy. Finding the latter in a high place
difficult to ascend; and at the time of the attack being overtaken
by a rainstorm, and deceived by some Indian spies into the bargain,
whom he sent to reconnoiter the enemy--from this combination of
circumstances it happened that the said Captain Joan Pacho and nineteen
soldiers were killed. The rest retired without securing any advantage
or avenging themselves. News of this being brought to the governor,
he sent Captain Toribio de Miranda, a good soldier, to take charge
of that place, with orders not to make any entry, or inflict any
punishment until he was ordered to the contrary. The latter is not
permitted to be done until there is a better supply of men and money
in the islands, because without these there will be a greater risk,
for the king of Jolo is assisted by his brother-in-law. When there
shall be a better supply of men and money, Miranda will be sent
expressly to punish all the people of this island, and ravage it,
because it is dangerous and of no profit.

The island of Mindanao is almost three hundred leagues in
circumference. It is a land of slight elevation; although of good
climate; it is sparsely settled, and its inhabitants very warlike
and inclined to arms. Their only aim is to rob and kill. There is
a scarcity of supplies in some parts, though cinnamon is found in
some districts, and a large quantity of wax everywhere. Tortoise
shells are also found. They weave cloth from medriñaque and some from
cotton. All the inhabitants on the coast and the river profess the
doctrine of Maoma, and those of the uplands are heathens. Although
it cannot be maintained without assistance, still it is necessary to
maintain it, in order to avert the injuries which on the other hand
would be received by the islands of the Pintados. It would usually
be necessary to bring an army for their defense, if the Spaniards
should abandon the island of Mindanao, and the chiefs rebel.

[_Endorsed:_ "Relation of the condition of the island of Mindanao,
cited in section ix of the letter of July 12, 1599, concerning
the war."]



The State of the Kingdom of Camboxa in Relation to these Phelippinas
Islands


The past year, one thousand five hundred and ninety-six, Don Luis
de las Marinas, governor of these islands, sent Captain Joan Xuarez
Gallinato with an armed fleet to the assistance of the king of
Canboja, who had asked him to defend him from the king of Sian, who
had threatened him; and the former offered to introduce Christianity
into his kingdom and make friends with the Spaniards. When aid
arrived at Canboxa, it appeared that the king had retired with his
children to the kingdom of Laos, for fear of the king of Sian, who
had occupied his kingdom; and that Anacaparan, military commander
of Camboxa, had assembled the greater part of the people of Camboxa,
who had remained. Having met the Sianese and recovered the kingdom,
he was powerful enough to claim it and become tyrant. Some of the
Spaniards who arrived at Canboja beforehand without their commander,
on account of a storm which separated them on the way, although they
were received with simulated friendship by Anacaparan, heard later
that he was plotting to kill them. Provoked by this and other injuries
which a number of Chinese, who had gone to the cities of Hordemuz and
Sistor (the chief cities of that kingdom) in five trading-vessels,
had inflicted upon them, and for which the tyrant refused to give
them any satisfaction and justice, the Spaniards, who numbered about
forty soldiers, attacked the Chinese and Anacaparan and his men, a
numerous force, in his palace. They made so great havoc among them,
that they killed the tyrant king and many of his men, completely
crushing them. They took the Chinese ships, and without harm or
injury retired to their own ships, defending themselves from a much
greater number of warlike enemies and elephants who charged them. At
this juncture the rest of the Spaniards arrived at Camboxa with
their commander. Considering what had just taken place, and that
the land was in rebellion and the legitimate king in the country of
the Laos, he thought that it would be impossible to set foot there
on account of the unfavorable condition of affairs. He started to
return to these islands; but, as the weather was not suitable for the
voyage, he coasted along Cochinchina, where he repaired his ships,
and sent overland, to the kingdom of the Laos, Bias Ruiz and Diego
Bellosso, well-known to the king of Canboxa, to acquaint him with
what had taken place in his kingdom, so that he should descend upon
it. Thereupon he left Cochinchina, where he had had some unpleasant
encounters with the king and natives, in which, however, he sustained
no loss. He reached these islands in September of ninety-six, with
the flagship and part of his men. The other ship was crippled by
a storm and made port at Malaca, and the rest of the men came in
the following year from Malaca. When Blas Ruiz and Diego Bellosso
reached the kingdom of the Laos, they found that the king of Canboxa
and his elder son were dead, and that the younger, called Prauncar,
alone remained, together with his mother and grandmother. This son,
in company with Blas Ruiz and Diego Bellosso, descended upon Canboxa,
with an auxiliary force of six thousand Laos. They found the country
divided by factions, and that a son of the tyrant whom the Spaniards
had killed had returned to reign over the greater part of it. There
were many battles with these enemies of theirs, all of which--by the
help of Blas Ruiz and Diego Bellosso, and about ten Spaniards, from
those who had made port at Malaca, who joined them--were gained by
Prauncar. These few Spaniards did marvels in the sight of all these
heathens, so that Prauncar, the legitimate king, has recovered his
whole kingdom, except one small province which still remained for
him to subject. On account of this, and of the friendship which his
father had had with the Spaniards, and the assistance which he had
just received from them, he wrote to me by an ambassador of his, who
came to this city, of the outcome of all these matters, asking me to
send religious and Spaniards to settle his kingdom, make Christians,
and build churches, offering every facility for it. At this time Don
Luis Dasmariñas, having some knowledge of affairs in Camboxa, urged
me to give him permission to go with some men at his own cost to begin
the conversion of that kingdom, and its settlement by Spaniards. This
expedition being proper, in my opinion and that of the Audiencia,
because of its many consequences for the service of God and his
Majesty--whence the so desired entry to the mainland could be begun,
in order that the many heathens there may come to the knowledge of
the holy Catholic faith, and submission to his Majesty--I made an
agreement, regarding the expedition, with the said Don Luis, with
the conditions and in the form which is contained in the copy which
accompanies this, together with the letters which I am writing to King
Prauncar. Therefore Don Luis Dasmariñas collected an armed fleet,
well provided with men, arms, and supplies and other necessaries,
and also some religious. He sailed with them from the harbor of
this city, in the middle of September of this year. The ambassador,
well-satisfied with so strong an expedition, left after him. I hope,
our Lord willing, that he has already arrived at Camboxa, because
the voyage is a short one, and that he is about to begin what we so
much desire. I made a list of the men in these islands, particularly
of the supernumeraries who had come from Nueva España. I found many,
who on account of being lazy, and the land being too poor to support
them, seemed to me suitable for this expedition, especially as this
occupation of theirs from which so much good is expected, was to be
made without any cost to his Majesty. I shall continue my account.

After Don Luis Perez Dasmariñas sailed from this city from the
port of Cavite, with two moderate-sized ships and one fusta, with
the said force, well provided with supplies, arms, and munitions,
taking with him as admiral, Pedro de Beistigui, he went by way of
Bolinao, [30] to catch the tide from there, in order to cross with
it to the mainland, above the shoals of Aynao [_i.e._, Hainan],
near Camboxa. A few days later, news came to the governor from the
alcalde-mayor of Nueva Segovia in Cagayan, that the fusta of Don
Luis's fleet, in charge of Captain Luis Ortiz, had made port there,
badly crippled by a heavy storm, which had separated them from the
fleet, shortly after the departure from Manila. They followed the
coast until they came to the bar of the said city of Segovia. It was
preparing to sail again in search of the said fleet; this they did,
after such repairs as were possible within ten days. After that, other
news was received from the alcalde-mayor that the admiral's ship of
the fleet was also lost in the same storm on one of the Babuyanes
Islands, where the men, artillery, and clothing were saved; that
the ship was lost; and that vessels were sent in which the admiral,
his crew, and their clothing should be brought to the said city,
which was effected. They brought the news that the storm had been
very heavy and had lasted five days; and that the flagship, being a
more seaworthy vessel, had put to sea and had been seen no more. An
order was sent immediately to the alcalde-mayor of Cagayan to provide
supplies from another ship, and other necessities for the admiral,
so that he could pursue his voyage. It was done as soon as possible,
with new instructions and orders from the governor to follow the
course which Don Luis gave him in his instructions at the time of his
departure; and that if he should arrive at Camboxa before his general,
he was to execute the orders in his instructions for the undertaking,
whereupon he left. Some months before Don Luis Perez Dasmariñas
sailed from the Ffilipinas, Captain Don Joan Çamudio had sailed in a
small but well-fitted vessel for China, to purchase iron, saltpeter,
lead, tin, and other very necessary articles for the provision of the
camp at Manila; because, for three or four years, the Chinese have
not brought anything of this kind in their vessels. He encountered
considerable resistance to his entry into China on the part of the
Portuguese from Macao--who, hearing the news of his arrival, set out
to find him, and tried many times to sink or burn his ship, and to
show him other evil treatment. It was their intention to prevent
the Spanish from coming to China or knowing anything about it or
its trade; and this they tried to do with the greatest obstinacy and
enmity. But affairs were managed so well with the viceroy of Canton,
called the _tuton_, and especially with the _laytao_, or chief judge
of that province, that not only were the Portuguese prevented from
uttering their previous calumnies against the Spaniards--namely,
that they were robbers and highwaymen, coming to make war on China,
and other things of that sort--but the Chinese even assigned and gave
to the Spaniards a port eight leagues from Canton, called Pinal; so
that, from that time on, the Castilians of Manila and the Philipinas
Islands, if they wished, could come there freely and securely to trade,
and for any other purpose that should arise. They were allowed ingress
into the city of Canton, and a house was given them there, in which to
assemble by night or day. This very much astonished the Portuguese,
because it was a thing that the Chinese had never done for them. Don
Joan Çamudio and his men lay in this harbor of Pinar with their ship,
busy supplying their needs, when they were informed that Don Luis
de las Marinas, with the flagship of his fleet, had run before the
storm spoken of above, had made the coast of China, and had landed
near Macao; that the ship was so weakened that it sprang a leak there,
and foundered, the crew, artillery, and munitions being saved, with a
small part of the clothing that they carried. They also learned that
the Chinese mandarins there gave the Spaniards a kind reception, from
whom the latter procured a few vessels with which to get to Pinal,
where they were informed that Don Joan and his men were; and that
the Portuguese of Macao not only refused to help them in this matter,
but also contrived to subject them to considerable inconvenience and
ill-treatment, in order to complete their destruction. After this,
Don Luis himself arrived at Pinal with his men and the remains of
the shipwreck, by the vessels given them by the Chinese, avoiding the
Portuguese of Macao who were the enemies of the Castilians. Don Luis,
upon finding himself and his men in the harbor of Pinal, in company
with Don Joan de Çamudio and his men, made known the particulars of
his past loss, but did not lose his courage for continuing his Camboxa
expedition, thinking that the other two ships of his fleet had gone
on. Therefore he immediately sent to Canton to ask permission of the
laytao to buy a ship in which to continue his journey. The Portuguese
again opposed them, showing greater assiduity and uttering greater
fabrications than they had done before with Don Joan de Çamudio--saying
that they were corsairs, and that they had followed Don Joan to join
him and make raids on China. But it profited them little, because
the laytao of Canton ordered Don Luis and his men to enter the harbor
of Pinal, where the other Castilians were, where they would be given
whatever they needed. Don Luis de las Marinas was very much pleased
and comforted at this, and continued in his determination, especially
in securing a ship which he needed. He could not buy, nor anyone sell
him one without the permission of the laytao, on account of strict
laws against it. There was an abundance of cloth in this country,
with which they immediately provided themselves, besides supplies and
munitions. Don Joan de Çamudio accommodated him with some artillery,
and other things that he had, of which Don Luis had need, so that now
the only thing lacking was a ship. They brought every influence to
bear on the laytao, but the Portuguese in Canton continually opposed
them by every means.

At this time, the end of December, ninety-eight, Don Joan de Çamudio,
having made haste from China, set sail from Pinal, leaving Don Luis
de las Marinas and his men settled there, waiting for permission
to leave China with their ship, regarding which they still had no
definite assurance. In a few days Don Joan reached the coast of Luzon
in safety, and entered the harbor of Cavite. He brought letters from
Don Luis Perez Dasmariñas. From them and what Don Joan said, they
were informed of what had happened to Don Luis and his flagship, and
that he was waiting in Pinal, until he should secure a ship, so that
he could continue the undertaking which he had begun. He requested
assistance of arms, munitions, and other things which were lacking at
Canvoja, to be sent him. The governor was much pleased with this news,
which was better than he had hoped, because it was feared lest the
fleet of Don Luis with all his men had been wrecked and drowned in
the great storm they had encountered, because nothing had been heard
of the flagship for so long a time. He immediately sent the things
that Don Luis requested on a vessel, which was about to sail to the
kingdom of Sian, in charge of Captain Joan de Mendoza y Ganvoa. A
little later, in the month of May, some trading-ships came from
China to this city of Manila, from one of which they received letters
from Don Luis de las Marinas and his men, advising them that he had
finished his preparations for his voyage and expedition; and that,
after the departure of Don Joan de Çamudio from Pinar, he had again
suffered greater vexations and persecutions from the Portuguese of
Macao, but that the mandarins had silenced the latter, and had even
inflicted the lash, regarding the matter as one which concerned the
Chinese. He said that he would sail some time in March for Camboxa. He
also mentioned other things they saw in China at that time.

In the middle of the month of June last, four soldiers, sent by
Don Luis Perez Dasmariñas to Don Francisco Tello, governor of the
Philipinas, came here in a small vessel, bearing advices that Don Luis
was still at Pinal in some distress. He had bought a Chinese ship
at Canton which seemed in good condition, in order to continue his
voyage to Camboxa. Having embarked, he was already two days on his
way after leaving port, when the ship began to leak in the stern,
so that at considerable danger he was obliged to make port again,
where he was scarcely able with great risk to arrive, The ship being
of no use, he asked the governor to send him assistance in men, arms,
and munitions, and also a ship from the islands, in order to prosecute
his voyage. The governor, being suspicious of Japon, and having few
men and arms, wrote to Don Luis, with the approbation of the royal
Audiencia, that he was himself in great need of the things requested
from him, and at present more than ever. Therefore he requested and
counseled Don Luis, that since he found himself so exhausted, and
with a so inadequate supply of all things to continue his expedition,
and with no prospect of help now or afterward from the Philipinas,
he would advise him to return to Manila and abandon the enterprise,
since the voyage had turned out so unfortunately; and that besides
that, there was great need of his men in the islands. Don Luis was
not ordered strictly to do this, as he had spent so much money on this
expedition. This message is being sent him by Captain Joan Tello, who
will leave in about a week for Pinar, to continue the good beginning
made by Don Joan de Çamudio in the province of Canton. I believe that
for that very reason of having spent so much, Don Luis may wish to
investigate the state of the kingdom of Camboxa. This may be done
in such a way that we may attain what we so much desire, namely,
the establishment of the holy gospel in that kingdom, which will be
of so much importance. May our Lord direct this matter.

_Don Francisco Tello_

[_Endorsed_: "Relation of the condition of the kingdom of Camboxa,
as regards the Phelippinas Islands, cited in section 11 of the letter
on the war, July 12, 1599"]



Depositions Regarding the King of Chanpan


_Testimony_: In the city of Manila, on the thirtieth day of the month
of September in the year one thousand five hundred and ninety-three,
Gomez Perez Dasmariñas, governor and captain-general in these islands
for the king our lord, declared before me that he has been informed
that the infidel king of Chanpa is responsible for many wrongs,
assaults, and thefts committed at sea by his men and fleets, and by his
orders, upon the persons and property of both Christians and Pagans,
on the route to many trading-places of Christians--as, for instance,
Malaca, Macan, Goa, Xapon, and other places. Many of them he has
attacked, robbed, and deprived of life and property--causing them to
enter his ports under his word and promise of safety; but afterward
breaking it, and inflicting great cruelties upon them, to the great
offense of God and injury of Christendom. In order to give the king
our sovereign an account of what is going on, and that he may know
the truth, the said governor ordered the following deposition to be
made before me.

_Joan de Cuellar_

_Testimony_: Then, on this said day, an oath was received in due form
of law, regarding the aforesaid, from Gregorio de Vargas. Being in
the said city, and questioned about the matter, this witness said
that, being three leagues more or less beyond the harbor of Chanpa,
the king of Chanpa sent him a message, saying that he was a friend
of the Portuguese (ten or twelve of whom he named), who were in his
country building a junk. He also said that since the weather was very
unfit to continue his voyage, he would better enter his port until
the weather improved. Upon receiving this message, he entered with
his junk, but he found that it was all a lie, for the king immediately
took him prisoner, and seized his ship, with all its cargo. He found
out that the statement regarding the Portuguese was all a lie, because
there was not one of them there. He also found out that the king had
captured many others by this deception, for many Christians told him
that they were taken the same way. He knows that the king captures
ships on the sea, and goes about robbing the neighboring kingdoms,
impeding trade, commerce, and free passage, and disturbing the peace
on the seas. He likewise compels the Portuguese Christians to sail on
the said ships for the purpose of robbery. He is a pirate and thief,
and a pagan who, in accordance with the teachings of his idolatry,
has two hundred men killed, in order to bathe in their bile; and
those by whom he has himself washed must be virgins. There is also
a diabolical custom that, when a chief dies, they burn his body;
his wife and his women are also burnt in the same fire. Because of
this and other abuses and pernicious idolatries, and, above all,
by the general injuries which he inflicts upon all travelers, on a
route so general and so necessary as that for Japon, China, Yndia,
and many other places, and for Çian, Patan, and Canboja (which is the
key to all that region), this witness thinks that it would be a very
acceptable service to God to go to attack him and to clear the sea
of those tyrannies and robberies, and take from them their land and
their harbor, which will be much to his Majesty's purpose for great
designs. The said witness declares that the king has a great deal of
artillery, which he has seen, moreover, with his own eyes. The other
things he has heard said by captives. This is all that he knows, and it
is true, according to the oath which he swore. His age is thirty-seven.

Signed, _Gregorio de Vargas_

Before me:

_Jhoan de Cuellar_

_Testimony_: Then, on this said day, the oath was received, regarding
the aforesaid, in due legal form from Diego Belosso, at present in
this city, who swore in the name of God and by the sign of the cross,
under which charge he promised to tell the truth. Being questioned
regarding the matter, this witness said that he knows it must have
been ten years ago that a junk belonging to Don Jhoan de la Gama was
lost on La Barela, which is an island lying near Chanpan, where there
were many Portuguese Christians and those of other nations, and a
cleric who was going in the said junk from Macan to Malaca. The said
people disembarked, where this same king of Chanpan captured them
all, distributed them as slaves, and otherwise ill-treated them,
even forcing them to carry timber. Captain Roque de Melo sent an
embassy to the said king of Chanpan, asking him to return the people
whom he was holding in captivity for ransom, or in any other way. The
king ransomed some, but refused to ransom others, so that more than
half of them remained there. He also said that those who went to that
country were forced into slavery. This witness knows all of this to
be true, because he was at Malaca at the time. He also heard it said
that the king who was then reigning had ordered the execution of his
own father. Being in Canboja about six years ago, this witness heard
that a junk which was on the way to Canboja from Çian ran aground
at Chanpan in a storm, where, in like manner, all the Portuguese and
others who were aboard were captured and robbed of their merchandise;
but that their junk was resold to them, and the crew ransomed. This
witness also knows that a Portuguese, whom the king of Canboja,
according to his custom, had made a nobleman of his kingdom, was,
while aboard a trading-vessel, struck by a storm so that he put
in at Chanpan, where the king of Chanpan ordered his execution,
because he knew that he was a nobleman in Canboja. The others who
were with him he made captives. This deponent, while in Canboja, saw
some of the Portuguese who were captured in Don Jhoan de la Gama's
junk, which was lost there. They were deprived of all their toes by
order of the said king of Chanpan, because they had once escaped,
but were caught again. About ten years ago, while this witness was
at Malaca, he learned that a vessel coming from Canboja to Malaca,
laden with munitions and supplies for the fortress at Malaca, went
ashore near Chanpan, and many Christians, who were on the vessel,
were captured. The king of Jor [Johore] being at war with Malaca about
five years ago, the said king of Chanpan sent him aid, and otherwise
assisted him considerably; so that with the assistance which the
said king of Chanpan lent him, they put many Portuguese and other
Christians to death. Captain Francisco de Villegas being at Chanpan,
with a ship and some men, the king made them embark upon his own
ships to rob and plunder with him. They went to Canboja, where they
captured a large number of people, because when the latter saw bands
of Portuguese coming, they thought that they were friends. The king
is an obstacle to both trade and general commerce, for quite commonly
he is wont to coast with his fleet, along Cochinchina and Canboja,
doing considerable damage to the merchants going from Canboja and
Çian to trade, to Malaca and other neighboring places--as Patan and
China, for instance--without sparing anyone whom he meets. The said
king of Chanpan is guilty every year of murdering many of the people
of his own land, to possess himself of their bile, in order to bathe
in it. The latter the witness has heard from people who were captives
there, and who saw him commit these and many other abominations. He
has also heard it said that when any noble or chief dies, the king
orders some women to be burnt alive, with terrible cruelty, with the
body of the deceased; for, according to their religion, the dead are
burnt. Lastly it was about a year ago, when Gregorio de Vargas and
his companion Blas Ruiz escaped from Chanpan to Canboja; they said
that their ship had been stolen from them in Chanpan, with all their
property aboard it. Their captors even ordered no food to be given to
them. Considering all the above, it is the opinion of this witness,
that it will be a great service to God and his Majesty, to attack
the said king of Chanpan, and put a stop to so great abominations and
tyrannies as he ordinarily practices, since he is in the path of all
the vessels going to those coasts--where he has seized a large quantity
of artillery and arms from those lost there. All that he has said,
this witness has heard from persons who had been captives there, and
he affirms it to be true and the extent of his knowledge, according
to the oath which he has sworn. He has no other information. His age
is thirty-four.

Signed, _Diego Veloso_

Before me:

_Jhoan de Cuellar_

_Testimony_: On this said day was received an oath in due legal form,
concerning the aforesaid, from Pantaleon Carnero, under which charge he
promised to tell the truth, concerning anything asked of him regarding
the subject aforementioned. This witness said that, when he was in
Macan in the former year of ninety-two, he heard it said there by
many persons that the king of Chanpan robbed Sebastian de Araujo of
a junk which he had built there, and a culverin which he had mounted
on it; and that he ordered the murder of two Spaniards aboard the
junk, and the captivity of the others. He afterward ransomed them
for gold and other things which they gave him. He subjected them to
great annoyances and ill-treatment, until one night, when they had an
opportunity, they fled, without finishing their ship, and left their
property behind them. This witness has also heard it said that about
ten years ago, he seized a junk, belonging to Don Juan de Gama, who
went ashore there in a storm. He captured the crew, and robbed them
of all their belongings. Another junk from Canboja bound for Malaca,
while Captain Roque de Melo was there, was captured by the said king
of Chanpan, with all its crew, and the merchandise that they had
with them seized. The said Rroque de Melo sent the king an embassy,
asking him to ransom the men whom he had taken prisoners on the said
junk. Half the crew was ransomed, but the others were kept by the
king. This witness has heard it said that some of the prisoners who
remained there escaped, but were caught again. The king ordered their
toes to be cut off because they had escaped. The said king of Chanpan
is a very great pirate, and usually goes about with a large fleet,
robbing and assaulting all the ships possible, making prisoners of
all their crews, along all those coasts, which he can do because he
is on the regular route. This witness has heard it said that the
said king has a large store of artillery and other arms from the
vessels that he has seized. It is the opinion of this witness that,
since the damage which the said king of Chanpan does every year to the
trading-vessels of Canboja, Çian, Patan, China, and other neighboring
places, is so great, valuable service would be done to God and the
king our sovereign, by attacking and crushing him as so dangerous an
enemy, and thus ensure the safety of that route. This witness has
also heard it said that the said king of Chanpan is so cruel, that
every year he orders the death of many of his own people, in order to
bathe in the bile of those killed. This has actually been witnessed
by many persons who have been captives there, from whom this witness
has heard it. Everything that he has said he knows to be the truth,
according to the oath he has sworn. His age is twenty-two.

Signed, _Pantaleon Carnero_

Before me:

_Jhoan de Cuellar_

_Testimony_: On this said day an oath was received for the further
investigation of the aforesaid, from Fernan Caravallo, at present
in this city. He, having sworn in due legal form, promised under
this charge to tell the truth regarding everything he knew. When
questioned concerning the subject aforementioned, this witness said
that he is a citizen of Macan, and that there he has heard it said by
many persons, sailing on trading-ships from Macan to Malaca, Canboja,
China, and other countries, that the king of Chanpan is a very great
pirate, usually cruising about with a large fleet, assaulting the
merchants whom he meets and robbing them of their ships, imprisoning
their crews, and stealing their property; and that he does them great
violence and injury. About five years or so ago, Sebastian de Araujo,
an inhabitant of Macan, sent some men to Chanpan to build a junk
there. When it was almost finished, the king of Chanpan seized it,
and imprisoned the said men who were building it. Two or three of
them were killed; and for those who remained in captivity, the said
Sebastian de Araujo procured ransoms. Some fled with the said ship,
when opportunity offered. Witness has also heard it said that the king
has seized many other Portuguese ships that have gone ashore there
in storms, and others that he deceitfully causes to enter his ports
by offering them a safe harbor, but whom he afterward imprisons,
robs of their goods, and treats with great cruelty. All the above
this witness has heard said by certain persons who have been in
captivity there. It seems to this witness that it will be a matter of
the greatest importance to attack the said king of Chanpan and crush
him, because he is in the route of the vessels where he does a great
deal of harm, because all the trading-vessels from Malaca, Canboja,
Çian, Patan, China, and other neighboring countries have to pass by
that place. It will be a great service to God our Lord, and to his
Majesty, to remove so great a pirate from the vicinity. Everything
that this witness has said is the truth, and what he has heard said
concerning the things asked him. His information goes no farther. His
age is about thirty-seven years or so.

Signed, _Fernan Caravallo_

Before me:

_Jhoan de Cuellar_

[_Endorsed_: "Inquiry against the king of Chanpa."]




Letter from Governor Don Francisco Tello


1. _This recounts that on all occasions the state of affairs of
these islands has been reported, and was not enlarged upon because no
instruction had been sent nor has been up to the year 1598, on which
account many things pertaining to the service of his Majesty, and of
importance for this country, have failed to receive attention._ [31]

As I have at various times written to your Majesty, you ordered me
to come here and serve in this country, without giving me the royal
instructions of despatches to that end. Accordingly many things of
importance which your Majesty commanded me to attend to were left
undone at the time I came. When I arrived in these islands I wrote
to your Majesty at length of those things which could be managed in
spite of the short time I had spent here. These despatches were lost
in the ship "San Phelipe" which Don Luis Perez Dasmarinas despatched
in the year 1596, and which was lost in Xapon. The next year, 1597,
I awaited the royal instruction of your Majesty in order to govern my
action by it; but neither did that come, until the past year, 1598. I
govern my action according to that of Gomez Perez Dasmarinas, my
predecessor, and with that I have stumbled through various matters. In
the past year, 1597, I wrote at length to your Majesty describing
the condition of the country and that of Japon, together with the
state of the expedition to Mindanao, and all other things which seemed
expedient. I also wrote that I had married Doña Tomasina, my relative,
and the daughter of Doctor Horosco, president of your royal Audiencia
of Guadalaxara--humbly beseeching your Majesty to approve of this,
since Doña Tomasina was not a native of this country; and I had not
gone beyond your Majesty's intentions, for you gave me permission
to bring my wife to this land. As she died on the way I married
Doña Tomasina, whom I brought from Mexico. In the past year, 1598,
I received the royal instruction of your Majesty and other royal
decrees which were mentioned therein, at the time when the ships
were being despatched. Those things which could be done at that time,
considering the short time before they left, I attended to then. I have
in everything worked for the service of our Lord and your Majesty,
conformably to the pious zeal and spirit with which I am serving you
here; and I have carried out those things entrusted in your royal
service to my predecessor.

2. _That it is expedient, in order to realize the results of the great
expense in these islands, that religious should be sent each year to
gather the harvest which should be taken from it; and that an account
should be sent of the Indians here, both Christians and infidels,
and a memorandum of the religious._

As the holy intention of your Majesty, in the expenses which from your
patrimony you incur in this country, is principally the conversion or
the heathen here, and the establishment of the holy gospel in place
of their idolatries, there is no better means than the teaching
of the Christian doctrine and the presence of its ministers. That
your Majesty may have a fuller report of it, I am sending an account
stating how many Indians are pacified, and acknowledge the royal name
of your Majesty in these said islands; the number of Christians and
infidels; and how many are taught and how many to be taught--not
only in the encomiendas under your royal crown but in the private
ones. Accordingly I beg your Majesty to be pleased to further this,
appointing each year, as usual, religious of exemplary life, so that
they may bring with more love and gentleness our holy Catholic faith
to the Indians; for certainly as much as a good minister edifies,
finding fault injures. With this goes the memorandum which your Majesty
ordered me to send, of the religious in these islands and those whom
it will be necessary to bring from España each year. Those who are
here are assigned as well as was possible, so as to give instruction
to all. The mission villages are in some confusion and the orders
somewhat mixed with one another. This could not be remedied as it
should have been, owing to the untimely death of the archbishop,
which occurred on the fourteenth of August of the said year of 1598.

3. _That the bishop of Camarines has not come, and that the other two
arrived in the year 98, and did not bring bulls for the partition of
their bishoprics, and that they are getting along well._

The bishop of the province of Camarines [32] did not come, and
therefore it is being ecclesiastically governed by the chapter of the
cathedral of Manila, _sede vacante_, as has been done hitherto. The
bishops of the city of Nueva Segovia and of Cebu arrived in these
islands in the past year of 1598, as I wrote to your Majesty. They
did not bring bulls from his Holiness nor decrees from your Majesty,
directing the division of their bishoprics. Each one has therefore
taken what seemed best to him: he of Nueva Segovia took the territory
beyond the province of Pangasinan, and he of Cebu took possession
of the island of Panay, saying that his bishopric included all the
province of the Pintados. The chapter of this holy metropolitan church,
_sede vacante_, held otherwise, and the case was brought before this
royal Audiencia. Its decision left the bishop in possession, to avoid
disagreement, until your Majesty should command that the partition
be definitively made. He is at present in this city celebrating
confirmation in the place of the archbishop, and will officiate at
the obsequies of the king our lord, of glorious memory. The bishop of
Nueva Segovia is in his church. They are men of holy life and fulfil
their duties well.

4. _That to finish the work on the great church entirely, there is
needed a tower and sacristy; and that these are not built, for lack
of money, which is being raised by various alms and grants._

The work on the great church of this city would have been completed
some time ago, but for the lack of money; and, with the tower and new
sacristy which are being built, it will be finished in all points. The
work is of stone, moderately elaborate; when the means are at hand
it will be continued to completion. I manage always to help it with
various alms and expedients, and at present I am assigning it two
toneladas for the chalices and ornaments, which sell at two hundred
pesos. That you may know how the fourteen thousand ducats which
your Majesty, in your royal instructions, ordered me to assign it,
has been spent in it, that sum was given toward the building and
ornaments; I have ordered that the accounts be rendered, and when
they are settled I shall inform your Majesty of their substance.

5. _That, in accordance with a royal decree, inspection has been made
of the great church, and it has been found very poor in ornaments;
and that two prebends and two half-prebends have been erected._

In accordance with a royal decree of your Majesty, directed to the
archbishop and myself, your Majesty directed us to make a visitation of
the church, inspect the ornaments which it has, and give our opinion
regarding the dignities and prebendaries which it would be expedient
to have there, and with what stipend. The said visitation was made,
and we found the church very poor in ornaments; and your Majesty is
informed that for the time being it would be sufficiently supplied with
two prebends and two half-prebends, which we established--the prebends
with a stipend of two hundred pesos per year, and the half-prebends
with a hundred and fifty. I await your Majesty's approval.

6. _That the hospitals are in good condition, and are being helped
with alms and grants; and there has been incorporated, in that for the
Spaniards, the Confraternity of La Misericordia; and that possession
has been taken of that for the natives and the accounts audited,
a sworn statement of which goes with this._

Your Majesty orders me, by a clause in your royal instructions,
to provide carefully for the hospitals. In fulfilment of this I
have inspected them, and have ordered the auditors to do the same
in their turn. They are in very good condition, each one having two
apartments of its building finished in stone, with its work-room,
stewards, nurses, and two Franciscan religious for each, who live
in the hospital. At the royal hospital for the Spaniards I have
incorporated the Confraternity of La Misericordia, which includes
the richest people of this country. It has more than a thousand eight
hundred and sixty pesos of income, and I am adding five hundred more
for eight years, making in all two thousand three hundred and sixty,
besides which they have a farm for raising cattle. The accounts of
these funds are kept, for the superintendent, by him who enters in his
place each year. The royal hospital for the Indians has five hundred
pesos of income, two hundred pieces of cloth from Ylocos, one thousand
five hundred fanegas of rice in the hull, one thousand five hundred
fowls (which your Majesty presents to them), and a farm for breeding
cattle. I am aiding both of them with various alms and grants, and,
as I have informed your Majesty, I regularly assign to that of the
Spaniards eight toneladas, which are worth eight hundred pesos each
year; and to that of the natives four, which are of proportionate
value. I took possession of that of the natives in your Majesty's
name, according to the royal patronage, and audited the accounts,
a sworn statement of which will go with this.

7. _That the seminary for the training of girls is in good condition,
and the building finished; but it has little income, and will have
to be reduced to a convent of professed nuns, and its income somewhat
increased._

The Seminary of Santa Potenciana is in very good condition; for
not only has the church been finished for some years, but it has
a capacious building entirely of stone, in which some thirty women
are leading a religious life. Most of these are the maiden daughters
of honorable men; others are poor mestizas, and still others have
been left there who have husbands or fathers absent on your Majesty's
service; there are also a few older women. They have a superior who is
a woman of quality, and who lives a very exemplary and pious life. All
of them intend either to remain there in the service of God, or to
leave married, and in a bettered situation--as several have done and
are now doing (thanks to the good name which the institution has),
which is the holy intention of your Majesty. They have a director
and a confessor who do not live in the building, as no apartment has
been built for them. For two months past the holy sacrament has been
administered there. These women, thus secluded, celebrate the divine
offices with singing, and with as much veneration and as fittingly
as if it were a convent of nuns founded forty years ago. It has four
hundred pesos of perpetual income and as much more temporarily from a
shop in the Parian of the Sangleys; but this is not enough to maintain
it, and so they are in great need. I contrive to help it with alms
and various grants wherewith it may be supported. I have tried to
reduce it to a convent of professed nuns and have done my best with
the viceroy of Nueva España, to have him send me two religious women,
of pious life, from Mexico to found it. He answers me that there is
no one who dares to go to these islands, on account of the difficulty
of the journey and the inconvenience of the ships. I beseech your
Majesty that--as this work is so important to this commonwealth,
and in order to place in a better position here the daughters of
honorable men who have not the money to marry them, on account of
the depreciation of the encomiendas and property--you may be pleased
to order the viceroy to be diligent in coming to our aid by enabling
these religious to come; and that you will give to this seminary an
income adequate for its maintenance, or give me permission to apply
to it some repartimiento of Indians.

8. _That Captain Don Luis Perez and the fathers of the Society are
establishing a seminary for the natives; that this had not been done
earlier because the income assigned to it has not been furnished;
and that the work should be furthered._

Don Luis Perez Dasmariñas, according to an order which he had from
your Majesty, agreed with the fathers of the Society of Jesus that
they should establish a seminary for the natives, where they might be
taught civilized ways and instructed in religion; and that he should
give them the wherewithal to erect a building, and a thousand pesos
of income for its maintenance. To begin the work, he presented to the
said Society six hundred pesos, and the income was put in the treasury
of the fourths. When I arrived here I confirmed these negotiations,
according to the royal decree of your Majesty in which you gave me the
same orders; and likewise the royal Audiencia, being petitioned to
confirm them, did so. This work has ceased because enough money has
not been furnished for it, and because the income is not sufficient,
owing to the fact that the said treasury of the fourths is much
embarrassed. If it be your Majesty's pleasure, it would be well that
this holy intention of your Majesty be furthered, so that the Indians
may learn the Spanish language in an orderly manner, and in this way
be better instructed. For this it will be necessary to give the said
Society the means to build the said seminary, and the thousand pesos
of income each year in perpetuity, from the royal treasury of your
Majesty, or else a repartimiento of Indians, as soon as one becomes
vacant--your Majesty giving me permission to apply it in such wise
that, besides this instruction, education and a living may be given
there to a few poor students, who will be learning the language at
the same time. When they are ordained they will act as ministers of
instruction, and will make it unnecessary for so many ministers to
come out here at so great cost to your royal estate.

9. _That measures have been taken for the execution of the royal
decree brought by the bishop of Nueva Segovia in regard to rendering
submission; that difficulties have begun to arise in its execution,
and that information concerning them is sent_.

From the hand of the bishop of Nueva Segovia I received the royal
decree of your Majesty in which you ordered me, by the best and most
gentle methods possible, to compel the natives of these islands to
render submission to your Majesty (this ceremony having been neglected
at first), so that the tributes which they pay may be collected with
more justice. I was ordered to join with the archbishop, bishop,
and other prelates, the superiors of the orders, in its execution. I
acted accordingly, having the said royal decree read to them, and the
intention of your Majesty explained, for the greater peace of your
royal conscience. Havings conferred and consulted in regard to it,
the said committee came to a decision regarding the matter, which
your Majesty will order to be examined by the authorized copy which
I am sending. This is what has been done since then, in virtue of
their decision. Instructions and directions have been sent to the
alcaldes-mayor and to the religious in all the provinces, that by
the gracious methods which your Majesty directs, submission shall be
rendered to your Majesty. In the province of Ylocos, in the diocese of
the bishop of Nueva Segovia, this was very well done; and submission
was rendered to your Majesty. Likewise the whole district of Manila, a
mission of the Augustinian fathers, has rendered submission. La Laguna,
in charge of the Franciscan fathers, has not so easily yielded; for
the natives there have asked a year's time in which to answer; and I
have left La Laguna in this state, until I should give an account of
it to your Majesty, as you direct me. The same thing will be done in
the other provinces which ask delays. Thus far I am not informed of
what has been done. Things have always been as they are now, without
there being any scruples; and, when these islands were conquered
and subjected, they were placed in obedience to your Majesty with
just as many requirements as the other parts of the Yndias. Your
Majesty has lost here many troops and much money. It is more than
thirty-four years during which they have had the true knowledge of
God our Lord, and of His holy gospel law, by virtue of which your
Majesty has possessed this country and collected tribute from his
vassals--who have received great benefit in being such; for in the
time when they were heathens they were subjected to many tyrannies,
imposed upon them by the chieftains whose subjects they were, who
took from them their wives and property during their lives. Now they
are secure in all these things, and much benefited in spiritual and
temporal goods. They are in no wise oppressed by the collection of
the tribute; and if the effect of this royal decree must continue and
be in operation as provided therein, there will be many difficulties,
such as have already commenced with the seeking of delay. Your Majesty
will hold nothing securely, and for the same reason will have no
justification for possessing this land. I am sending your Majesty
a copy of the instruction and directions which are ordered for the
execution of these measures, and one of the answers by the natives
of La Laguna; so that, seeing these difficulties, your Majesty may be
pleased to order a review of this affair and a determination of what
is most expedient for the service of your Majesty. In the meantime
I shall put matters into the best state possible.

10. _That two sermons have been preached on the bulls, and that very
little alms have resulted; that at present they are considering how
to preach to the Indians and that no doubt they will succeed, when
it will be necessary to send more bulls, according to the memorandum
of the treasurer_.

Before I came to these islands the first preaching of the bulls
concerning the holy crusade had commenced; and last year occurred the
second, which is now in progress. I have written to your Majesty my
sentiments in this matter; and now I say again to your Majesty that,
although the bulls which are preached here and disposed of among the
Spaniards are very necessary for them, the alms proceeding from this
source, allotted to your Majesty, are of very little importance,
because there are not many people here--for the Spaniards do not
amount to two thousand, and of these there are very few who are not
exceedingly poor. The proceeds of the first preaching, when reckoned
up, do not reach two thousand pesos; and that these alms might be of
more importance, I have considered how the bulls might be preached
to the Indians. I have found that in the time of Don Luis Perez many
difficulties arose, as it was said that they are a people only partly
and newly converted, and that with the bull their present simple
mode of life would be ended. For this and other reasons I did not
resolve last year to have the crusade preached to the Indians. At
present I am considering this more seriously, and the preaching will
doubtless be begun at the pressing demand which the fiscal has made in
your Majesty's name, although with a small number of bulls, because
few have come from Mexico. I wrote to them to send more than usual,
and gave an account thereof to the royal Council of your Majesty for
the holy crusade. I am sending a memorial which will go with this,
concerning the bulls which are necessary, with their kind and value,
both for the Spanish people and for the natives, that your Majesty
may provide according to your pleasure. [33]

11. _Establishment of the royal Audiencia_.

Last year I wrote how this royal Audiencia was founded, and sent an
account of the reception of the royal seal; and how there were in the
Audiencia three auditors, Doctor Antonio de Morga, the licentiate
Telles Almasan, and the licentiate Alvaro Çanbrano, the licentiate
Salasar as fiscal, the licentiate Padilla as reporter, and a clerk
of court; and how the licentiate Don Antonio de Ribera Maldonado,
the first auditor, had remained in España.

12. _Death of the licentiate Çambrano on the fourteenth of March;
and in his place is proposed the name of the licentiate Salasar,
fiscal of this royal Audiencia, and for the office of fiscal the
licentiate Padilla, reporter._

On the fourteenth of March of 98 the licentiate Çambrano died,
from an attack of malignant fever. In him your Majesty lost a good
servant. Since his place must be filled, it will be well provided
for in the person of the licentiate Salasar, your fiscal in this
royal Audiencia, a person who, besides his broad and deep learning,
is worthy of whatever favor your Majesty may see fit to grant him;
and the office of fiscal will be well filled by the licentiate Padilla,
reporter of this royal Audiencia, who is a man of learning and justice,
and is diligent in your Majesty's service.

13. _That the auditors remaining are doing well_.

The two auditors who remain here are faithful subjects, and attend
punctually to the service of your Majesty.

14. _That the auditor Maldonado has not come from Nueva España_.

The licentiate Don Antonio de Rivera Maldonado, who was expected
this year, did not come. He wrote me that he had not received his
instructions.

15. _That the ecclesiastical authority had usurped the royal
jurisdiction, and that this was corrected on the arrival of the
royal Audiencia_.

Before this royal Audiencia was reëstablished, the ecclesiastical
authority had usurped the royal jurisdiction; and I was several times
excommunicated for defending it by not allowing them to raise their
secular revenues, of which I had already given an account to your
Majesty; and so they were raising them everywhere without my being
able to help it. Since the coming of the royal Audiencia, several
acts have been passed for correcting this, which are effective.

16. _That it is expedient to take the Parian from the Sangleys,
as it is injurious to the commonwealth_.

Don Gonzalo Ronquillo, during the time of his governorship, founded
a Parian for the Sangleys within the limits of the city, so that of
those who come for commerce, a number of artisans of all trades might
remain in the country, for the service of the commonwealth. Gomez Perez
Dasmarinas, finding it too thickly peopled and with too many houses for
the security of the city, removed it outside, to the place where it now
stands. Its growth has increased to such an extent that more than three
hundred houses of wood and cane have been built, and in them are more
than three thousand Sangleys. This Parian is most injurious for this
commonwealth, because the people who live in it are of no use except
to raise prices in the community, all the provisions being consumed
there; and they commit many offenses against God our Lord. In it there
are many hucksters. There is no way to remedy all this except to be
rid of it altogether; for, besides what has been mentioned, it will
be a saving to this city of more than a hundred thousand pesos each
year, and the country will be more secure. For, having no buildings
in which to store the cloth, they will sell it through the streets
or in their ships, as they used to do before they had a Parian; and,
to get away quickly, they will offer it at more moderate prices. I
have considered this affair with the royal Audiencia; and, having
their opinion, you will do in regard to it what is most fitting for
the service of your Majesty and the maintenance of this country.

17. _That, as there were no royal buildings, some good ones have been
built of stone, in which the Audiencia meet, and the president and
Doctor Morga reside._

When I arrived in this country the royal buildings were demolished,
and there was no place for the Audiencia to meet, nor for the residence
of your Majesty's servant who governs here. I therefore used all my
efforts to erect royal buildings which should be substantial, and they
have been built, and are at present finished off with hewn stone. There
are three suites of apartments: one toward the street, in which the
Audiencia meets, and where the royal seal is; a second toward the sea,
where I live; and the third is situated in the middle, where resides
Doctor Morga, auditor of this royal Audiencia. It will be expedient
to continue work on this building until it is made large enough for
the rest of the auditors and officials of the royal Audiencia to live
in. I assure your Majesty that they suffer inconveniences in coming
from their homes to the Audiencia and its sessions, in so intemperate
a climate; and if they lived together they could attend better to the
service of your Majesty. To put this work in the state in which it is,
ten thousand pesos, which was its cost, were borrowed, as there was
no money in the royal treasury, from the funds of the fourths; and I
wrote to Mexico to send me that amount in order to pay it back. This
has not been done, and I beg your Majesty to order the viceroy to
send that sum of ten thousand pesos, since it was spent in a work so
important for the service of your Majesty; and to send as much more
to continue the work, if that already used be considered well spent.

18. _That houses of stone were built for the cabildo and in them was
placed the coat-of-arms which your Majesty granted to this city_.

I also found this city without houses for the cabildo and that the
regidors with great inconvenience and little dignity were going about
seeking the houses of citizens for the meeting of the cabildo. At
the expense of the city funds I have built some good stone cabildo
buildings on the plaza here, and in them is placed the coat-of-arms
which your Majesty presented to this city. With these and other
buildings which have been built during the time I have been here,
or are now being erected, this city is much improved in appearance.

19. _That the powder-house being too near and in an unsafe position,
a vault was made in the fort of Santiago, where it is now kept_.

I found the powder-house in an unsafe place, and as it is so necessary
to guard and preserve the powder, I ordered a vault of stone to be
made in the fort on the point called Santiago, where it was put and
is now kept with entire safety.

20. _That it is necessary to establish religious instruction in the
Ladrones; and, as it cannot be sent from here, I have written to
the viceroy asking him to order the officers of the ships from Nueva
España to leave ministers there_.

As the royal instruction which I received had not been brought here
when I came to serve your Majesty in this government (as I have
before explained), what your Majesty ordered in one clause of it,
that on the passage by the island of Ladrones ministers for religious
instruction to those Indians should be left there--such persons as
I might select--has not been executed. Accordingly I have considered
it with the royal Audiencia here; and, together with their opinion,
the intention of your Majesty was communicated to the viceroy of Nueva
España, so that he might carry it out, by ordering the officers of
the ships which shall come in the year 600 to leave there a couple
of religious and ten soldiers as a guard. But as the ships arrived
here from a different direction, and the voyage was a difficult
one, the will of your Majesty has not been carried out. I believe
this will be a work very important for the service of God our Lord
and your Majesty; for in the year 1596 a religious of the Order
of St. Francis, with a sailor, who were passing by the islands of
Ladrones, disembarked from the almiranta "San Pablo" in the boats of
the Indians of those islands, more than three hundred skiffs having
come alongside of the said ship. The Indians took them on board and
carried them to land where they remained during the period of a year,
up to 1597--when, as the ships from Nueva España were again passing
on their way to these islands, having as commander Don Lope de Ulloa,
the said religious and soldiers [_sic_] arrived alongside the ships
in the boats of the Indians, and were received on board. When they
arrived here, the religious gave an account of what he had seen in
the islands of Ladrones, saying that there were many islands thickly
peopled with Indians, who are men of good stature, and strong. They
are a tractable and kindly people. They regaled him and his companion,
and showed them much respect. The land abounds in fish, rice, and
_camotes_. They are heathen; but if the religious would enter there
with love and tactfulness they would teach them. I hope in our Lord
that He and your Majesty will be served in bringing those heathen to
a true knowledge of God.

21. _That farmers have not been brought from Nueva España for the
introduction of agriculture, and that the viceroy should be told to
send them._

For the reason mentioned in the preceding clause, I have not been
able to get farm-laborers from Nueva España, as your Majesty ordered
by a clause of his royal instruction, so that the cultivation of
the soil might be introduced into this country, by associating the
farmers with the natives, so that the latter may be instructed in
farming according to our usage. As soon as I understood the will of
your Majesty, I sent to ask farmers from the viceroy; and he answered
that he would send them another year.

22. _That a demand has been made to have the horses and mares brought
over, as ordered, and that the viceroy has been remiss in this_.

In the same way a demand has been sent to the viceroy regarding the
horses and mares which your Majesty also ordered brought from Mexico;
and I wrote to your Majesty that this was not done.

23. _That rewards for services have been made in accordance with the
order of his Majesty in clause 17 of the royal instruction_.

In the matter of rewards for services, I have tried to have them
given to the most worthy and capable citizens, in accordance with
clause 17 of the royal instruction of your Majesty (as you may see
if you so please by the account which I am sending), not only in
the encomiendas in repartimientos of Indians but in other offices
of importance. Although I have done this with all possible care and
justice, there are so many claimants, and so little material--and
each one expects to be, by right, the most favored--that there must
needs be complaints, which is one of the annoyances of this government.

24. _That an account was sent of the Spaniards who serve in the
islands, giving their names and localities._

With this will go the report which your Majesty ordered to be sent
concerning the Spaniards who serve your Majesty in this country,
whether with or without encomiendas; and of their characters and ages,
and other details about them.

25. _That two new ships have been built, of five hundred and one
hundred and fifty toneladas respectively; and that they departed in
good condition, and are at present making a voyage_.

As there are not enough ships to ply between here and Nueva España I
have built two--one of five hundred toneladas, and the other of one
hundred and fifty--which were completed; and both are making voyages
this year to Nueva España.

26. _That three ships came from Nueva España; and that one of them,
which belonged to his Majesty, was given to an administrator by the
viceroy, and that he sent a decree giving directions to the royal
Audiencia, under penalty._

Three ships came this year from Nueva España, two belonging to private
individuals and the other to your Majesty. Your Majesty's ship,
called the "Santa Margarita," was given to Joan Pardo de Losada, as
administrator, by the viceroy of Nueva España. Since the viceroy did
so, he may have had an order therefor from your Majesty. The royal
Audiencia considered the fact that the said Joan Pardo brought a
decree from the viceroy ordering the governor and the royal Audiencia,
under penalty, not to meddle in the affair which he had decreed;
and saying that the penalty would be that supplies would not come
as agreed. Accordingly the original was retained, in order to give
an account thereof to your Majesty; but, in so far as regards the
execution of his charge, he was not hindered. It seemed best to me
to give an account thereof to your Majesty, so that in the future
you may provide what may be most expedient in the matter.

27. _That the viceroy of Nueva España kept back the money of citizens
of those islands to the great damage of this country, the licenses
being given to Peruvians._

Your Majesty has ordered that the viceroy of Nueva España should each
year give licenses to citizens of this state for five hundred thousand
pesos, the money to be brought here in return for their merchandise
which they export hence. It happened that this year's sale of the
goods that went over last year was profitable; and the said viceroy,
although he was under obligation to execute that order, did not do
so. He assigned to the citizens only two hundred thousand pesos in
licenses, and the balance, making the sum of five hundred thousand,
to Peruvians, on condition that they should become citizens in these
islands for a certain time--thus keeping back from the citizens
three hundred thousand pesos, which has brought about disastrous
injury. For not only were they prevented from availing themselves
of their own property, but the Peruvians to whom were given, in
their places, the said licenses, being wealthy people, came loaded
down with money to be registered--although the fiscal of your royal
Audiencia and another royal official, who went to inspect the ships,
could not find any proof, as the money had all been taken out before
they arrived at the fort. When they arrived here, finding much cloth
in the possession of the Chinese and not considering its price, they
spent their money. When the citizens came, as they could not lade the
share which had been assigned them, since no money had come therefor,
the Peruvians freighted the ships; and the profit which, through your
Majesty's gracious aid, the citizens of these islands should have
had, was enjoyed by the Peruvians. May your Majesty order this to be
investigated, and direct in regard to it what may be best for your
royal service and for the maintenance of this country. As the licenses
to lade their cloth in the ships which are going to Mexico--being one
of the profits and rewards which we have in this country to give to
deserving citizens--is a matter which always gives rise to complaint,
no matter how justly the distribution is made, in order to avoid this
and to proceed as justly and satisfactorily as is generally possible,
I have ordered during the whole time I have spent here that, first of
all, the ship should be gauged for its tonnage by persons chosen by
the city--men who are intelligent, conscientious, and disinterested,
and otherwise competent for the said gauging. The allotment has been
and is still made as justly as possible.

28. _That the persons appointed to lade the ships did not keep the
order which was given them, breaking it to the injury of citizens,
and were arrested_.

This year were appointed, to direct the lading of the new ship "Santo
Toma," Captain Gaspar Perez, the alcalde-ordinary, Captain Juan de
Arsega, and Captain Christoval de Asqueta, a regidor of this city. They
were given the usual order to lade according to a list, beginning
first with the men who are most deserving and have been longest in
the country. As they did not keep the order which was given them,
and laded after their own fashion, I have arrested them. The citizens
of this city have brought in complaints of them and many claims have
been filed against them. I am receiving testimony thereof, in order to
punish them according to their crimes. I have always tried, from the
day I entered, to govern as your Majesty was pleased to command me,
and to protect this commonwealth and the poor in it, even with my
own property; and it is well known in these parts that I have done
this so far as lay in my power.

29. _That a port called El Pinar, has been opened at Canton, where
Spanish ships may go with safety to trade with China, for which there
is a chapa [i.e., "passport"]._

By clause 21 of the instruction for my government, your Majesty gives
permission for certain citizens of this island to trade--if that
seem best to me, and with the consent of the royal Audiencia--in the
neighboring kingdoms where trade and traffic with these islands is
permitted. With this basis, and the knowledge that the Chinese do
not resist the coming of the Spaniards as they have hitherto done,
and considering the importance of the opening of this port in that
country, so that the preaching of the holy gospel might enter there,
which is your Majesty's desire, I determined last year to give a
license to Don Juan de Çamudio to go (in his own vessel, at his own
expense) to the province of Canton, and establish in the best way
possible his enterprise; and to bring certain metals and other articles
which we were lacking, for the royal stores of these islands. He made
the voyage and carried out this mission. Besides this, he opened at
Canton a port for the Spaniards in China, which is called El Pinar,
although he was greatly opposed by the Portuguese of Macao; and the
Spaniards were left there to go to trade in Canton--a house being
given them inside the city, and a chapa to come back and settle there
whenever they might wish to. With this despatch and some merchandise,
the said Don Juan came back to these islands well content.

30. _That a ship is being sent to Canton, to follow up the good
beginning made there by the Spaniards_.

This year, in continuation of the beginning which Don Juan Çamudio has
made in China, I have agreed with the opinion of the royal Audiencia
that it was therefore best to send another ship, well equipped with
artillery and arms. This vessel will sail very soon, and has for
captain Joan Tello y Aguirre; and it will cause no expense to the
royal exchequer. I hope in our Lord that a way is about to be opened
up for what is desired for so great and powerful realms.

31. _That the king of Sian, desiring trade for his realms with the
Spaniards, sent an embassy to them, which was well received; and
that he treated Joan Tello very well, and opened a port at the city
of Odia_.

After my arrival in this government I received a letter from the
king of Sian, a copy of which will go with this. In it he told me
of his desire for commerce and trade with these islands of your
Majesty. Seeing how well disposed this king was, in the year past
(1598) I despatched Captain Joan Tello with an embassy for the king
in answer to his, indicating great esteem for the friendship which
he offers me, and for his desire for the trade of the Spaniards in
his kingdom. I offered him in the name of your Majesty the closest
friendship. Captain Joan Tello made the voyage, and, having fulfilled
his embassy, made an agreement also that a port should be left open
for trade, so that the Spaniards could go there and settle freely,
and be exempt from taxes. They brought in their ship ivory, benzoin,
and stone for the citizens of this city. He came back here with the
response of the king of Sian, a copy of which will go with this. I
have understood, indeed, from Captain Joan Tello that the king of
Sian has in his house a religious of the Order of St. Dominic, who
was sent from Malaca to administer the sacraments to the Christians
who come there from India on their commercial voyages. Seeing what a
good opportunity and opening there was to begin preaching the holy
gospel in that kingdom, I sent another ship this year, very well
supplied, having as captain Joan de Mendoça, with an embassy to the
king beseeching him to consent to have sent from here four religious
of the said order, for if they also were with the one who was residing
there, it would further much the end which was sought; and asking that
he would admit these religious. Once settled there, they will succeed
in obtaining good results. Captain Joan de Mendoça is now expected,
and whatever news he brings on his arrival I shall communicate to your
Majesty. May God further these affairs, as they are especially for
His service and for the advantage of the royal crown of your Majesty.

32. _That the city of Cebu sent a ship to Castilla, in the year 1597,
which was lost on the sea_.

Your Majesty having granted the city of Cebu authority to despatch
a ship to Mexico, it did so; and the ship left Cebu about two years
ago, carrying merchandise both for the citizens of that city and of
Manila, which was considered best; but, from the time when it left
until now, there has been no word of it. It is thought that it was
lost, which is no slight matter for this country, coming in addition
to the loss of the ship "San Phelipe"--with which, and the retention
of their money which the citizens of Manila have suffered, and other
hardships, this commonwealth is hard smitten, as is the courage of its
people. If there is any way in which to resuscitate it, it will be for
your Majesty to give permission for the citizens thereof to despatch
a ship of three hundred toneladas to Peru every two or three years,
with the products of this country; they will not undertake to carry
anything more than flagstones, ivory, and other things which are not
carried from España, and this will not cause any loss to the royal
customs duties of your Majesty.

33. _That it brings much damage upon this colony that the officers
on the voyages are appointed by the viceroy of Mexico_.

I have already advised your Majesty of the irreparable injury resulting
to this commonwealth from the appointment of the officers of the ships
on this voyage by the viceroy of Nueva España; for they come here
provided with money on commission, and when they have arrived here they
invest it; nor is there any way to prevent them from lading the ships
as soon as they have left the port. This they effect by placing their
cloth in small vessels six or seven leguas away; and then they take
from the ship the cloth belonging to the citizens, and lade their own,
from which results great injury to this country. This was done even
by Don Antonio Maldonado, son of the licentiate Maldonado, auditor of
Mexico, who unloaded on a beach a great deal of cloth belonging to
citizens here. This would not happen if the officers were appointed
here; because those appointed would give bonds before they left,
and, as they must come back and render an account, they would not
commit these evil acts. Your Majesty will be pleased to order what
is most expedient.

34. _That a sworn statement is being sent of the execution and
fulfilment of the decrees_.

I am sending your Majesty a sworn statement of the decrees which have
been put into execution, besides those which are being carried out;
and the same will be sent next year.

35. _That it is customary on feast-days that the city banner should
be brought out, and that the royal Audiencia should be present, and
the standard-bearer should walk at the left hand of the president;
and that this custom was opposed by an auditor_.

One of the principal feast-days which is kept in this city is that
of the apostle St. Andrew, in memory of the victory which was on
that day won against the Chinese pirate Limahon, driving him from
the land when he had already hemmed this city in. On that day the
city brings out its banner, and goes to vespers and mass at Santa
Potenciana. In the time of the former royal Audiencia, they used
to go with the pennant to the royal houses with the city officers,
and from there the president and auditors set out to the festival;
and the president had the standard-bearer at his left hand, and the
senior auditor at his right. I am informed that the same thing is done
in the city of Lima and that of Mexico. I have had this custom observed
here; but the licentiate Almazan, auditor of this royal Audiencia,
has denied that the standard-bearer or any other person should be
stationed with the royal Audiencia without special permission from
your Majesty, whom I beg to be pleased to command in this what shall
be done. In the meantime, it will be continued as hitherto.

36. _That public feast-days are celebrated with veneration and
dignity_.

I assure your Majesty that the other public feast-days, such as Corpus
Christi, that of the patrons of the city, and the like, are celebrated
with the utmost veneration and dignity in this land, where we are in
the sight of so many heathen.

37. _That it is expedient that the Indians be punished with some
moderate fine of money, and not in rice._

Your Majesty has ordered that the Indians shall not be punished
in money fines; but as they all, in their perverseness and evil
disposition, are more afraid of the punishment of taking from them a
real than of a hundred floggings, the desired results do not follow,
and they do not plant, raise animals, and do other things tending to
the production of supplies, and to the common good. It would be well
for your Majesty to give permission for the imposition of moderate
fines in money. It is particularly unfitting that the chiefs should
be flogged, and in regard to this the royal Audiencia has commenced
to take some action. May our Lord protect the Catholic person of your
Majesty through many happy years. Manila, July 12, 1599.

_Francisco Tello_

_An account of the religious orders which are in these Philipinas
Islands; the provinces, houses, and religious contained in them;
and the ministers whom it is necessary that his Majesty should have
sent, in order that there may be sufficient religious instruction in
the islands_.

_St. Augustine--60 houses; they have 163 religious, and ask for 20
each year_. The Order of St. Augustine has occupied the provinces of
Tagalos, Pampanga, Ylocos, and Pintados. Being the first established in
these regions, they occupy the whole country. They have in the islands
sixty houses, which contain from two to three religious each--one
hundred and eight being priests, and fifty-three lay brethren. They
will have to establish more houses--not only for the newly-entered
countries, but that there may be sufficient religious instruction
in these islands. For this it is necessary that your Majesty send
each year twenty religious. These might be brought at a less cost
to the royal estate from Nueva España, where there are many of them;
and they would do very well, as they are used to instructing Indians,
and have already come half the way.

_St. Francis--40 houses; they have 120 religious, and need 50_. The
Order of St. Francis has occupied the province of Camarines, and has
there forty houses, and one hundred and twenty religious--ninety-seven
being preachers and priests, and twenty-three lay brethren. They need
fifty religious.

_The Society of Jesus has 12 houses and 43 religious_. The Society
has twelve houses, and occupies the province of Pintados, in Leite
and Ibabao. In them are forty-three religious--twenty-three of
these priests, and the rest lay brethren. They will occupy many
houses. Religious of the Society have gone to the pacification of
Mindanao, where they will administer instruction and establish more
houses. They have need of fifty religious.

_St. Dominic--12 houses; they have 71 religious, and need 50_. The
Order of St. Dominic has occupied the province of Cagayan, where
there are twelve houses and seventy-one religious. They need fifty
religious, in order that there may be sufficient instruction in the
province of Cagayan, where they must occupy a number of houses. Those
sent should be priests, because all the lay brethren that are necessary
are being received in the islands.

In all these four orders there are persons of much learning and many
accomplishments, and good linguists who instruct the natives, among
whom they have achieved great results. In the houses of the Society of
Jesus there are two colleges--one at Manila and the other in the city
of Santisimo Nombre de Jhesus--in which religious of very exemplary
life teach Latin to the Spaniards and give instruction to the natives.

_Copy of a letter written in the past year (1598) concerning the
erection of prebends and half-prebends of the cathedral church at
Manila. Cited in clause 7 of the governor's letter of July 12, 1599_.

Sire:

In accordance with what your Majesty orders me in his royal
instruction, we, the archbishop and myself, made a visitation
of the cathedral church, which is greatly lacking in all
necessaries, and particularly in chaplains, which is noticeable
on feast-days. Accordingly it seemed advisable to institute two
prebendaries, each with a stipend of two hundred pesos per year; and
two half-prebendaries, with a hundred and fifty pesos of stipend each
per year--to be paid in the same manner as the other canons. I beg your
Majesty to have this approved, since it has been done in conformity
with your Majesty's order to provide whatever was necessary. We are
considering from what source the other necessaries can be provided, as,
outside of the royal exchequer of your Majesty, there is at present
no other fund; and the royal treasury is in great need, between the
mortality of the natives and the taxations of Don Luis Perez de las
Marinas; the yearly income has diminished by more than fifteen thousand
pesos. We shall try our best to order affairs in the best possible
way. May our Lord protect the Catholic person of your Majesty, as we
your servants and vassals have need. Manila, the twelfth of July, 1598.

[_Francisco Tello_]

_Statement of the accounts received from the director of the hospital
for the natives. Cited in clause 8 of the letter of the governor of
July 12, 1599._

The accounts which the lord president, governor, and captain-general of
these islands, Don Francisco Tello, knight of the habit of Santiago,
ordered me, the accountant Bartolome de Rrenteria, to audit from the
seventeenth of September of the year ninety-eight, when the said lord
president was at the royal hospital for natives of these islands. He
inspected and took possession thereof in the name of your Majesty;
and ordered me, the said accountant, to make in his presence an
inventory of the income and property belonging to the said hospital,
and I did so, as follows:

It was found that the said hospital has, through the bounty of
your Majesty, five hundred ducats each year, paid from the fund set
aside for such purposes by the royal exchequer; one thousand five
hundred fanegas of rice in the hull, one thousand five hundred fowls,
and two hundred pieces of cloth from Ylocos; and a further grant of
four toneladas, to be sent each year in the ships of your Majesty or
others, without duties or freight charges. Likewise there was found, as
property of the said hospital, a farm for cattle, with a thousand head;
ten mares, four colts, and one horse; six men slaves with five married
slave women, and three other unmarried women and two unmarried men;
and four hundred pesos, in coin. Besides this, Antonio Valerio, steward
of the said hospital, has put in charge of me, the said accountant,
a quantity of money received from various persons. The said Antonio
Valerio has also rendered an itemized account of the whole thereof,
from the first of September of the said year ninety-eight to the end
of December of the same, and the expenses in that time amount to five
hundred and thirty-seven pesos and one tomin; he likewise rendered
another account in this year of ninety-nine, from the first of January
to the end of April thereof, and the itemized expense account amounted
to seven hundred and fifteen pesos and four tomins, as appears by the
book which is in my possession. Besides, all necessary provision was
made for divine worship in the said hospital. The said hospital has
a house of stone, amply adequate, with three halls and apartments,
and everything necessary and pertaining thereto. The said steward
has no further account to give, because by command of his Lordship
the accounts are audited every four months, and he will give what is
lacking at the end of August of this year. That this matter may be
understood, I have given this, at Manila, on the second of July in
the year one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine.

_Bartolome de Rrenteria_

_Copy of the instruction given to the alcaldes-mayor of the provinces
and to the religious, for the Indians to render submission to the
king our lord, and the measures taken in La Laguna. Cited in clause
10 of the governor's letter of July 12, 1599_.

The King: To Don Francisco Tello, knight of the habit of Santiago, my
governor and captain-general of the Philipinas Islands, and president
of my royal Audiencia, which I have ordered reëstablished in the
city of Manila in the said islands; or to the person or persons in
whose charge the government of them may be. Fray Miguel de Venavides
of the Order of St. Dominic, bishop of Nueva Segovia in those said
islands, has given me certain memorials and accounts of affairs, and
of measures suitable for their improvement, and for the security of
the consciences of the confessors, of the encomenderos and soldiers,
and of other persons, particularly in regard to what affects the
spiritual good of the Indians, and the obligation which rests upon
me to further it. As these are matters important to conscience and
reduced to two points, I directed that, for the consideration of them,
certain theologians, grave and eminent persons, should meet with the
president and members of my Council of the Yndias. What they agreed
upon was reported to me, and I now give you its substance and the
conclusion which has been reached. The first difficulty was whether
the faith must be preached to the heathen by poor preachers, provided
only with the support of God according to the gospel, and what has
been provided by the ordinances concerning discoveries; or whether
the said preachers must enter escorted by soldiers bearing arms. And
the question on the second point was, whether tribute should be levied
upon the infidels who are not opposed to the preaching of the gospel
and are not enemies; nor is there any other just cause for waging war
against them, except solely to maintain the Spaniards. "Supposing that
these tributes are imposed and levied primarily with the obligation of
giving instruction, and maintaining justice to those who are subjected,
they should not be levied on those who are not subjects and have not
received the faith." Having examined the said ordinances, it appears
that what is provided in them is in conformity with the precepts
of the gospel and with the justice necessary to the service of
our Lord, and to the promulgation of His faith in newly-discovered
countries. The bishop admits this, merely complaining of the lax
execution of the decree, and the great liberty which the captains
and soldiers take in interfering with the Indians and taking from
them their liberty and property. Since my will has always been and is
that the said ordinances should be observed, and whoever has violated
or acted contrary to them in the past has displeased me, I order
you that from now on you shall see to it that they be observed and
carried out, inviolably. And to this end I have ordered to be sent
to you--printed, and on separate sheets--the clauses which treat of
the order to be observed in preaching in newly-entered countries, and
how the tributes are to be levied; and the care with which, in both
matters, you are to proceed--all being directed toward the good and
contentment of the Indians, and their best condition, preservation,
and civilization. And this you shall again cause to be published,
adding penalty of death, perpetual banishment, or confiscation of
property to any or all transgressors, according to the degree of
their guilt. This you will execute inexorably, under penalty that,
besides considering you lax in your duty, I shall have you punished
with all rigor--and this infallibly, since you know my wish; and in
these scrupulous matters the peace of my conscience rests upon your
discharge of duty. In order that proper means may be taken in these
matters you will meet with the archbishop and the newly-appointed
bishops, and the superiors of the orders; and you will consider the
measures to be taken to satisfy the injuries inflicted, and whether the
tributes collected from the infidels contrary to the said ordinances
can conveniently be restored. And if this cannot be done without
great difficulty you will advise me thereof; and in the interval while
advising me and while I am providing what appears to me to be best,
everything shall remain in the same condition, with the peace and
propriety with which I hope that you are governing both spiritually
and temporally--as I charge you all to do, each in what concerns
him. Likewise you will confer with the said superiors and religious,
and bring it about that they shall undertake to remedy by love all
which shall be found to have been done through force and fear; for,
according to what the bishop tells me of these Indians, they are well
disposed (not only in spiritual but in temporal matters), freely to
render me submission. Done at Madrid, on the eighth day of the month
of February in the year one thousand five hundred and ninety-seven.

_I The King_

By order of the king our lord:

_Joan de Ybarra_

In the city of Manila, on the fifth day of the month of August in the
year one thousand five hundred and ninety-eight, the above-contained
decree was proclaimed by Francisco Rodriguez, public crier, in a loud
and clear voice, many persons being present, at the regular session
of the Audiencia. I certify this.

_Gaspar de Acebo_

In the city of Manila, on the fourth day of the month of August in
the year one thousand five hundred and ninety-eight, the governor
and captain-general of these islands, Don Francisco Tello, in
accordance with the royal decree of his Majesty, dated at Madrid,
the eighth of February of the year one thousand five hundred and
ninety-seven--which treats of certain difficulties suggested by
the bishop of Cagayan [34] in the Council of the Yndias and to the
royal person--assembled at the royal buildings the bishops of these
islands and the provincials and superiors of the orders thereof,
in consultation upon the said decree. The said governor having read
to them the said royal decree, and certain ordinances treating of
discoveries and pacification, exactly as is contained in the said
decree, and they having heard what his Majesty orders, and having
consulted thereon, a decision was reached in the said meeting as to
what the governor and captain-general should command in regard to the
ordinances which his Majesty sent him, and which were publicly read,
as hereinbefore stated, with the heavy penalties which the aforesaid
decree provides against transgressors. For the future they understand
that our Lord's service demands that, by peaceful means of love,
all the Indians should render voluntary and free submission to his
Majesty the king of Castilla, our lord; and they offered that by
themselves and the religious, and the other ministers under their
control, all efforts should be made that this might be accomplished in
a short time. As regards restitution for the past, it seems best to
them that what can be easily effected by pious works and other means
should be done; and as for the rest this means would be taken, that
the religious should gain over the Indians by love and gentleness,
and that they should grant the natives freedom from tributes, which
were levied in times past, while they were infidels. Therefore the
following persons have affixed their signatures.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Archbishop of Manila_
_Fray Miguel_, Bishop of Nueva Segovia.
_Fray Pedro_, [35] Bishop of Santisimo Nombre de Jesus.
_Fray Bernardo de Santa Catalina_, provincial.
_Raymundo de Prado_, vice-provincial.
_Fray Joan de San Pedro Martir_
_Joan de Rivera_

Before me: _Gaspar de Acebo_

This agrees with the original, which remains in my office:

_Roque Loino de Caceres_

In the village of Lumban, province of La Laguna de Bay, on the
thirteenth day of the month of June of the year one thousand five
hundred and ninety-nine, by command of the alferez Gregorio Ponce
de Leon, deputy of the alcalde-mayor of the said provinces for the
king our lord, and father Fray Antonio de Nombela, definitor of the
Order of St. Francis in the said islands, and guardian of the said
convent and village--before me, notary-public of the said provinces
for his Majesty, were gathered all the governors, chiefs, headmen,
and lords of barangay, and most of the timaguas and common people of
all the villages of said provinces, whose names are as here follow.

Don Hernando Larogajon, governor; Don Francisco Volor, Don Phelipe
Paguilagan, Don Mateo Umanguil, Miguel Manaycon, Simon Paniça,
Phelipe Damian, Don Gaspar Culiao, Bartolome Maconan, Bartolome
Parahan, chiefs and lords, heads of barangay of the village of Bay,
and several of their timaguas. Governor Don Juan Halimao, Don Diego
Caya, Domingo Sati, chiefs and lords of barangay of the village of
Tableco, and several of their timaguas. Lieutenant-governor Domingo
Labaulon, Don Francisco Meglilo, Don Antonio Tobantahel, Don Joan
Lagban, Miguel Bati, headmen and lords of barangay of the village of
Pila la Grande, and other chiefs, with common people, and several of
their timaguas. The governor of the village of Nacarlandos, Marcos
Brigilon; his lieutenant, Lorenço Manile; Domingo Pasdeyaen, Lucas
Mandig, Don Pablo Caranblin, Joan Manglas, Domingo Malapas, Mateo
Madhanay, Nicolas Magpisie, Antonio Magsibo, Fruian Lionan, chiefs,
headmen, and lords of barangay of the said village, and many other
chiefs and timaguas. The governor of the village of Mehay, Don Joan
de Mendoça; Don Esteban Luvas, Don Pablo Magbres, Don Diego Magpalo,
Damian Paoaviandes, Laramas, Don Antonio Dato, Diego Malapeg, Don
Lucas Tunuguli, Jusepe Vale, chiefs, headmen and lords of barangay,
and other chiefs and timaguas of the said village. The governor of the
village of Saloanij Guilinguilin; Don Juan Puhaban; the lieutenant,
Don Francisco Caraguen; Don Francisco Bala, Don Pedro Banguig, Don
Diego Limetig, Don Alonso Goor, Don Joan Pile, Don Diego Bagnor,
Don Bentura Ulay, Don Christoval Rarac, Don Christoval Banguis,
Don Diego Daolor, Don Antonio Quilala, Don Joan Ligno, Don Pedro
Alimango, Don Francisco Dales, Don Francisco Danga, Don Luis Guinton,
Venito Laquer, Marcos Abal, chiefs, head men and lords of barangay, and
other chiefs, and timaguas and common people of the said village. The
lieutenant-governor of the village of Panguil, Don Miguel Boag; Don
Andres Talamindor, Francisco Valor, Don Juan Mabaylo, Don Agustin
Labrian, Don Francisco Laguin, Don Pedro Pazhan, Don Andres Guilla,
Don Andres Ama, Don Luis Lanvan, Don Lorenço Apon, Don Phelipe
Panindo, chiefs and lords, heads of barangay, and other chiefs and
timaguas of the said village. The governor of the village of Paoil,
Don Joan Lagary; his lieutenant, Don Miguel Manduga; Domingo Pansas,
Sebastian Palangan, Don Joan Valoban, Don Alonso Bulanvel, chiefs,
lords, and heads of the said barangay, and other chiefs, common people,
and timaguas of the said village. The governor of the village of
Sampablo, Don Lorenço Lansapao; Don Agustin Magapan, Joan Masquiles,
Don Antonio Calapar, Luis Lapipir, Pablo Mandol, Ventura Pilapan,
Pablo Casyl, Joan Moage, Francisco Mayas, Pablo Caylo, chiefs, lords,
heads of barangay, and other chiefs, common people, and timaguas of
the said village. The lieutenant-governor of the village of Santa
Cruz, Joan Abalasaval; Gaspar Tosol, Joan Bago, chiefs and lords,
heads of barangay, and other chiefs, common people, and timaguas of
the said village. The governor of the village of Pililla, Don Joan
Yavi, Don Luis Abalo, Don Phelipe Bognor, Don Agustin Magcanayon,
Don Pedro Canayon, Miguel Togui, Antonio Mabanta, Lorenço Lagasia,
Bernardo Sampaga, Diego Manira, Martin Cosso, Juan Tangui, Lucas
Ayog, Don Luys Calyas, Clemente Lagnig, chiefs and lords, heads of
barangay, and other chiefs, common people, and timaguas of the said
village. The governor of the village of Moran, Don Francisco Laquiao;
Don Luis Limetig, Don Pablo Sosil, Don Francisco Baro, chiefs and
head men, lords of barangay, and other chiefs, common people, and
timaguas of the said village. The governor of the village of Lunban,
Don Juan Burlon; his lieutenant, Don Joan Alaman; Don Agustin Mamija,
Don Marco Ral, Don Rodrigo Pananbo, Don Phelipe Tangui, Don Ventura
Marlangaley, Don Alonso Bineg, Don Alonso Posolan, Don Agustin Asum,
Don Alonso Tindig, Luis Aveij, Don Diego Laval, Don Diego Gaddola,
Gonçalo Lima, Don Francisco Pirangaran, Don Pablo Caliox, Alonso
Paraorao, Don Diego Lahacan, Don Gonçalo Magcoli, Antonio Puragti
Habanpoli, Don Juan Bambin, chiefs and lords, heads of barangay,
and other chiefs, common people, and all the timaguas of the said
village and government. Don Agustin Baticio, Don Marcos Manalo, Don
Agustin Sandi, Pedro Cabasao, Dionisio Magsubey, Don Tomas Bagsit,
Alonso Sancabo, chiefs of barangay of the said province.

And all having assembled and come together thus, both the chiefs and
the timaguas, with the said Franciscan father guardian, Fray Antonio
de Nombela, as interpreter, they were given to understand why they
had been called together and were assembled. They were told how God
our Lord had granted them great kindness and grace in keeping them
under the evangelical faith, which remains in His holy church, in the
apostle St. Peter and his successors, who are the pontiffs, bishops,
and confessors who in His name administer instruction and point out
the way to heaven. Our Lord had liberated them from the blindness
and tyranny in which they were as subjects of the devil--who not only
caused the damnation of their immortal souls, which are to be cared
for, but likewise harassed their bodies and consumed their lives.

What is still more weighty, the most cursed and perverse sect of
Mahoma had begun, through its followers and disciples, to spread and
scatter through some of the islands of this archipelago its pestilent
and abominable creed; but the true God was pleased at that time to
bring the Spanish people into these islands, which was a cure and
remedy for the mortal sickness which the said Mahometan sect has
already commenced to cause in them. Besides this, the Spaniards had
freed them from the tyranny with which their kings and lords were
possessing themselves of their wives and goods, which was the greatest
injury which could be inflicted upon them. They were also reminded
of the great favor that God our Lord had granted them in giving
them for their king and natural lord the Catholic king Don Phelipe,
our sovereign, to maintain them and keep them in peace and justice,
with much gentleness and love. Our lord might have deferred the
conquest of these islands, and it would have been made by other kings
who are not so Catholic, as a punishment for the idolatry which they
practiced; then they would have fallen into greater blindness and sin
than before, and they would not have been so rich and well-provided
as they are, nor would their property have been so safe. All this
is greater advantage than they had in olden days, while they were
infidels. All this was declared to the above-named persons, so that,
in conformity with his will and pleasure they might render submission
to his Majesty, and acknowledge him as such king and natural lord; and
this, notwithstanding what they may have given by word or deed, for
the greater justification of the tributes enjoyed and being enjoyed,
which they have given and paid, and henceforth may give and pay, both
to his Majesty and to his vassals. And this writing is evidence in
all times that of their own will and pleasure they have rendered the
said submission and acknowledgment to their said king and lord. All
the said governors and chiefs, lords of barangay, and their timaguas
who are present, having understood through the interpreter the address
which has been made to them in the name of his Majesty, said together
and unanimously--and not only for themselves but for their subjects,
descendants, and successors in the dominion and lordship of their
barangays--that they recognized and held themselves fortunate in
having recognized our lord; and this because he has granted them the
favors mentioned, and greater ones, since the king our lord is more
Catholic and Christian than other kings of the world, and under his
temporal laws they have lived and are living in great security of
life and property, comfort, and peace, and with more liberty than
they ever thought to have, since they are free at present from all
the tyrannies to which they were subject in the time when they were
infidels. Therefore, in answer to what was asked them, as it was of
so great importance they sought for a delay, as the time is so short,
and they had not conferred and communicated with all the chiefs,
nor informed those of their villages of the resolution; and so they
separated, saying that there would be enough time from now until the
departure of the ships in the coming year, one thousand six hundred,
and that information about this negotiation could be sent then to his
Majesty. This they declared, and those who could do so signed their
names, also the said father definitor and guardian, and the said
lieutenant, as I certify. The witnesses were father Fray de Ponto,
guardian of the convent of Mahayhay; father Fray Tomas de Miranda,
father Fray Bartolome Ruiz, father Fray Alonso de Santana, Fray
Bernardo de Asincion, Don Francisco Bagua, Don Heronimo Aroppora,
Francisco de Nombela, Gregorio Ponce de Leon.

Before me:

_Joan de Ribera_, notary-public

_Copy of the letter from the king of Camboxa to the governor of
Manila. Cited in clause 27 of the governor's letter of July 12, 1599_.

_Copy of a letter from the king of Sian_.--I received the embassy of
your Lordship with the greatest pleasure, and for a long time past
I have desired to have a firm and true friendship between us. From
now on I beg that your Lordship will keep this, and this kingdom of
mine shall stand by it. And your kingdom and this kingdom shall be
friends, and particularly your city of Manilha. This shall be my duty
and yours for I have always looked to and upon you to keep the firm
friendship. The king of Portugal alone will take arms in his hands,
for in these times there are some troubles arising from the captain of
Malaca, Daroca Fiaon. For this I have pledged my word to the renewed
friendship, as before. As for the Portuguese, whatever your Lordship
asks or orders shall be done in this country. I am very fond of you,
and this leads me to keep for you all those who may wish to live
in this my kingdom; I shall permit it, for I shall receive all as
I have been seen to receive these, and as Captain Juan Tello said
that  ... I have received what your Lordship sent me; and by the same
person I will send a ring to your Lordship ... which your Lordship
will value. At Acibi Pacos, outside of my city. May 5, 1598.

_Statement regarding the fulfilment of the decree of his Majesty. Cited
in clause 31 of the governor's letter of July 12, 1599_.

I, Gaspar de Acebo, notary-public of the government of these
Filipinas Islands for the king our lord, certify to those who may
see these presents that the governor and captain-general of these
islands, Don Francisco Tello, knight of the habit of Santiago, in
fulfilment of the decrees and instructions of the king our lord,
which the aforesaid Don Francisco holds for the good government of
these islands, has been fulfilling and executing them in so far as
was expedient and for the service of the king our lord. The decree
which arrived here relating to the pancada [_i.e._, purchase in gross]
of the merchandise and cloth which come from China, directing that
it should be bought by one person, and that six persons should go
with it and dispose of the goods in Nueva España for the citizens
of these islands--being put into execution by the said governor, was
carried to the royal Audiencia of these islands in course of appeal
by the citizens thereof, in which court the suit is in progress.

Likewise the said governor, by virtue of his instruction, inspected
the cathedral church of this city, conjointly with the archbishop Don
Fray Ygnacio (whom may God keep); and in the presence of me, the said
secretary, inspected the ornaments of the said church, the plate,
and other articles of the service of divine worship. They ordered
the treasurer of the said church and the former stewards of the said
cathedral to render accounts, so that the property and income of the
said church might be known.

_Item_: By virtue of a royal decree, obtained by the petition of
the late bishop of these islands, Don Fray Domingo de Salazar, when
any canonry or prebend in these islands was vacated, the governor
might, as these islands are so remote from the kingdom of España,
present the person who should to him appear fitting for such canonry
or prebend. This has been carried out and executed thus far by the
said governor.

_Item_: The royal decree is being carried out and put into operation
which directs the establishment of schools in which to teach the
natives the Spanish language. The said schools are in charge of the
fathers of the Society of Jesus.

_Item_: By virtue of a decree of the king our lord, dated in Madrid
the eighth of February of the past year of ninety-seven, in which is
directed the order to be followed in bringing the natives of these
islands to render submission to the royal crown, and in publishing
the ordinances for newly-discovered countries, these were published
in this city; and the order to be observed in bringing the natives
to render submission was provided for by the archbishop (whom may
God keep), Don Fray Ygnacio de Santibañez, and the other bishops and
provincials of these islands, conjointly with the said governor. They
have begun to carry this out in several provinces of these islands.

_Item_: The said governor has ordered to be fulfilled and executed the
clause of the instruction which directs that duties shall not be levied
upon the Chinese or other nations in the neighborhood of these islands,
as they bring provisions and military stores to provide this camp.

Likewise, in fulfilment of another clause of the instruction, the
said governor took possession, in the name of and for the lord our
king, of the hospital for natives which is situated in this city,
and ordered accounts to be rendered of the property and income of
the said hospital.

_Item_: In accordance with a royal decree which deals with the fact
that the chiefs of these islands are being employed in governorships,
and directs that they be honored and favored by the magistrates,
this has been done and is being done by the said governor, Don
Francisco Tello.

_Item_: In regard to clause twenty-seven of his instructions,
by which the said governor is ordered and commanded to reduce the
number of encomiendas and villages, and ordains that they be in
places convenient for the administration of the holy sacraments to
the natives, this is being carried out without harshness, in those
regions which are at present prepared for it.

_Item_: Likewise some of the royal decrees and clauses of instruction
which were given to the said governor Don Francisco Tello have not
been carried out. In these it is ordered and commanded that certain
things are to be done for the good government of these islands,
conjointly with the archbishop thereof. As the latter died soon after
his arrival in this city, they were suspended, without any action
or consideration being taken of them, because the said governor was
commanded to communicate and act with the said archbishop.

In proof of the truth of what is here related, by the request and
command of Don Francisco Tello, knight of the habit of Santiago,
governor and captain-general of these islands, I have given the
present, dated in the city of Manila, on the fourteenth day of the
month of July of the year one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine. I
have therefore set my seal hereto in witness of the truth.

_Gaspar de Acebo_

We, the notaries-public and royal who sign here, certify and bear
witness that Gaspar de Acebo, by whom this instrument is signed and
sealed, is secretary of the government of these islands; and to the
instruments and documents which are drawn before him entire faith and
credit is given, in and out of court. That this may appear we have
given the present in the city of Manila, in the Filipinas Islands,
on the fourteenth day of the month of July, of the year one thousand
five hundred and ninety-nine.

_Francisco de Valencia_, notary-public.
_Joan Paez de Sotomayor_, notary royal.
_Juan Estebes_, notary for his Majesty.




Ordinances Enacted by the Audiencia of Manila


_An act decreeing that the Sangleys who are arrested shall pay their
creditors within six days, or have their services sold for debt_.

In the city of Manila, on the thirteenth of June, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-eight, the members of this court, the president and
auditors of the royal Audiencia and Chancillería of the Philipinas
Islands, while inspecting the prison, declared that, whereas, both
in the royal prison of this court and in that of the jurisdiction of
the alcaicería [Chinese market] many Sangley prisoners are arrested
for debts of long standing, who, by not having the means to pay,
or for their own purposes, being thus assured of their sustenance,
allow themselves to remain in the said prisons, without making any
payment: therefore, since it is advisable to remedy this evil, on
account of the great expense incurred by the Confraternity of La
Sancta Misericordia for the sustenance of the aforesaid prisoners,
and in order that the creditors may be paid, they ordered, and they
did so order, that the said Sangleys imprisoned for debts past due
be notified that they must pay their creditors within six days,
being warned that, if they do not, their services will be sold to
anyone who will give enough to satisfy and pay the creditors, and
to the amount of their debt; but if they cannot be sold, or if the
creditors wish to take them to the amount of the debt, they shall be
delivered to the latter in chains, in order to serve out the amount
of the debt. If the said creditors refuse to receive the prisoners,
they shall be notified to give them food in the said prisons at their
own expense; and, on failure to do so, the prisoners will be set at
liberty. Thus they voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act decreeing that notaries, whether public or royal, shall be
present at the review of charges against prisoners._

In the city of Manila, on the thirteenth of June, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands, while making a general review
of the charges against prisoners in the royal prison of this court,
ordered, and they did so order, in consideration of the fact that the
notaries, both public and royal, were not present at the said review
with the records of the suits against the prisoners, for which reason
the review was hindered, that the notaries should all be notified,
collectively and singly, to be present at such review of charges, with
the suits that they shall have, in order to report upon them--under
penalty of a fine of four pesos for the first offense, to be given
to the poor of the said prison. For the second offense they shall be
rigorously punished. Thus they voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act decreeing that the prison warden shall maintain a stricter
watch over the prisoners_.

In the city of Manila, on the twentieth of June, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands, on the occasion of a review
of charges against prisoners, declared that, whereas it has come to
their knowledge that many of the prisoners in the said prison leave it
to eat and sleep, and go to their houses and about their business,
and that those who are ordered to imprison them fail to do so,
so that from the aforesaid there has been, and is, a great deal of
disorder, and that the warden thereof does not fulfil and observe his
obligations: therefore, as it is advisable to remedy the aforesaid
evil, they ordered, and they did so order, that Baltasar Martin,
warden of the said prison, be notified that, now and henceforth,
he shall under no consideration permit any prisoner in his charge,
during the time of his imprisonment, to leave the said prison for
eating, sleeping, or any other matter outside of it. Prisoners who
are ordered to be imprisoned shall not be released except by order and
command of the judges by whose orders they are arrested. The aforesaid
warden shall observe the obligations of his office, being warned that,
if he shall act contrary thereto, he will be proceeded against with
the full rigor of the law; in addition to which, the penalties for
not exercising his said office in accordance with his bond and pledge
shall be executed against him. Thus they voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act decreeing that there shall be no hucksters_.

In the city of Manila, on the twenty-fifth of June, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors assembled
in this royal Audiencia and Chancillería declared that, whereas
in this said city of Manila all sorts of provisions have become
very dear, on account of the disorder that has existed, and does
exist, through having allowed many Sangleys and native Indians to
go through this city and five leagues round about it, trading and
bartering the said provisions--as, for instance, rice, wine, fowls,
swine, cows, buffalo, game, eggs, geese, kids, cocoanuts, bananas,
pullets, capons, fish, olive-oil, vinegar, and other provisions that
are gathered and raised within the five leagues, or are bought from
outside from the other provinces, islands, villages, and hamlets--and
act as hucksters and retailers of these provisions: therefore,
as it is advisable to provide the necessary remedy in this matter,
in order that the said disorder be avoided, they ordered, and they
did so order, that no person--Spaniard, Sangley, native, or of any
other nation, quality, and rank whatever--shall trade or barter,
now and henceforth, in the said provisions, or in any of them, in
this said city or within the five leagues of its jurisdiction. No
huckster shall buy or retail for his own trade or profit any of the
above things, under any condition, under penalty of confiscation of
everything thus found in his possession which he has bought or traded
for--half to be applied to his Majesty's treasury, and the other half
to go to the informer or constable who exposes him, or to the judge
who gives sentence. Besides this, any person who shall be discovered
not to have fulfilled this obligation shall, if he be a Spaniard,
for the first offense be imprisoned twenty days in the common jail;
and for the second he shall be banished for six months from this
city and the five-league circuit of this court, to a prescribed
residence. If he be a Sangley or an Indian, he shall for the first
offense be given one hundred lashes; and for the second shall serve in
his Majesty's galleys, or at the forge, or in the powder-house, for a
period of two years without pay. Those who obtain the said provisions
by cultivation and labor within a circuit of five leagues, or who bring
them from outside this city to sell them therein, may sell and bring
them freely, so that it be not to the said hucksters or retailers; and
provided that they bring them first to the public square of this city,
or up the river in their vessels, in order that the inhabitants and
dwellers in this city may be provided with whatever they may need,
for the time and space of two natural days. These being passed,
whatever they cannot sell they may carry away, and sell in the other
towns within the said five leagues. Likewise, they ordered that no
person shall go by way of the sea or the river or by highways whence
come the said provisions, to take or buy them from those who should
be bringing them, before the arrival of the latter with them in this
city, within the five leagues, under penalty of one hundred lashes;
and that the alcaldes-in-ordinary, the regidors, and other officials
of this city, and the alcaldes-mayor of Tondo and Bulacan and their
assistants, shall take especial care for the execution and enforcement
of this act in their districts, being warned that they will be punished
at their residencias, and will be charged therewith; and warning will
be given to those who take their residencias that their punishment
be executed. Thus they voted, ordered, and decreed over their names,
and that this act be proclaimed in this city and the suburb of Tondo.

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almaçan_
The licentiate _Albaro Çambrano_

Before me: _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act decreeing that no one shall embark for the purpose of leaving
these islands, without permission_.

In the city of Manila, on the first of July, one thousand five hundred
and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the royal Audiencia
and Chancillería of the said islands, being assembled, and considering
a petition presented by the licentiate Geronimo Salazar y Salzedo,
his Majesty's fiscal in the said royal Audiencia, declared that,
whereas many people who go unpunished by the royal justice for
murders and other crimes that they have committed, and others for
owing money to the royal exchequer, and for bringing suits against
the royal treasurer, and who have other legitimate reasons for not
being able to leave this city, absent themselves from it in order not
to be punished, or to pay what they owe, and go to Nueva España and
other places, favored and assisted by generals, admirals, captains,
masters, and other officers and persons of the ships sailing from
these islands, whence results much harm and trouble; therefore, in
order that the aforesaid evils be remedied, and that this may not be
so henceforth, they ordered, and they did so order, that no general,
admiral, captain, master, or any other officer or person, on whatever
vessel sailing from these islands, for Nueva España or any other places
whatever, shall receive, assist, protect, or conceal, in any manner,
any person of any rank or condition whatever, so that he may embark
on such ship or ships--even though he may go thereon as captain,
master, pilot, sailor, or in any other capacity--without securing
permission in writing from the governor and captain-general of these
islands, drawn up with the necessary conditions, and in the usual
form. If it should happen that the said person or persons embark so
secretly that they do not allow themselves to be seen by the officers
of the said ship on which they are, until it is under sail, as soon
as they allow themselves to be seen, the captain of said ship shall
be informed thereof, in order that he may make investigation of it,
ascertaining and assuring himself how and in what manner, and when
and how, they embarked and where; who helped and protected them
therein, and who saw them embark; and for what reason they secretly
embarked. The said officers shall arrest the person or persons who
shall have embarked, together with those who shall have given their
favor or assistance. They shall be found guilty in conformity with the
aforesaid, and placed in irons, so that at the first port where they
arrive, they may be handed over, with a copy of the investigations
which shall have been made, to the justice thereof, who shall keep
them prisoners. On the first occasion of the sailing of any ship, he
shall send them as prisoners to this city under a sufficient guard,
to the royal prison of this court, delivering them to the warden
thereof, and taking his testimony in the matter, delivering also
the original of the said investigation. They shall send a complete
and authentic copy of all the above to the fiscal of the said royal
Audiencia, in order that such persons may be punished as their offenses
demand. They ordered unanimously that no person, of whatever rank or
condition, for any cause or reason whatever, shall leave this city,
to go beyond these islands, or to leave them for Nueva España,
or any other places unless he has permission in writing from the
said governor, with the necessary conditions. Likewise, it shall
be understood by the captains, masters, pilots, sailors, and other
workmen on any ships whatever, in the manner aforesaid. In order that
this act be exactly enforced, it shall be publicly proclaimed in this
city and the port of Cavite. Copies shall be made of it and affixed
to the doors of the royal houses, so that it may come to the notice
of everyone, and no one may plead ignorance of it, so that one and
all may observe it in the manner aforesaid--under penalty of a fine
of five hundred pesos of common gold, to be applied to the use of the
royal treasury and the interests of the royal exchequer, to which
sum they hold them condemned as soon as they disobey this decree,
besides the deprivation of their offices. This penalty is to be
executed without any favor. Thus they decreed, ordered, and ordained.

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almaçan_

_An act decreeing that one of the auditors shall have charge of
reviewing the charges against prisoners every two months_.

In the city of Manila, on the fifth of August, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands, being assembled, declared that,
whereas there are many prisoners in the royal prison of this court,
whose numbers are constantly increasing, on account of arrests for
vagabondage and other criminal charges: therefore, in order that the
cases of such prisoners be settled and despatched with all promptness,
the charges against them reviewed during the week, and their cases
substantiated and decided, and that the order and system requisite to
the quick and efficient despatch of their affairs may be observed,
they ordered, and they did so order, that now and henceforth, an
auditor of this royal Audiencia shall, during the months assigned to
him, review the charges against prisoners, at such times and in such
wise as he may deem proper. The cases of such prisoners as are in the
prison must be definitely substantiated and concluded, without any
prisoner being able to escape, or any case to go unsettled. He shall
then refer them to the court of this royal Audiencia, in order that
they may be examined and decided therein. In the aforesaid examination,
he shall take particular care to follow the established practice,
so that there may be suitable method and system, in order to avoid
long imprisonments and delays in the cases. To execute the above,
full authority and power was delegated in due legal form. They ordered
the licentiate Christoval Tellez de Almaçan, auditor of this royal
Audiencia, to begin his months from today; then, consecutively, the
other members of the Audiencia. Thus they voted, and ordered it to
be registered as an act, and signed the same.

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almaçan_
The licentiate _Albaro Çambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act relating to the breeding of fowls_.

In the city of Manila, on the second of October, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas in the
instructions which have been given to the alcaldes-mayor of the
provinces of these islands, the latter have been charged and ordered
to take particular care that the natives thereof shall raise fowls,
in order both to pay their tribute, and to keep the land supplied with
necessary food; they are, however, informed that, although the said
alcaldes-mayor take particular care in the execution and enforcement
of the said instructions, the said natives do not breed the said
fowls, because no pecuniary penalties are exacted from them--whence
it results that they have none wherewith to pay their tribute;
and there is a very considerable lack and scarcity of them in this
city, so that they are worth three or four reals apiece, and then
scarcely to be found; therefore, to remedy this loss, they ordered,
and they did so order, the said alcaldes-mayor, now and henceforth,
to reward any of the said natives who raises the number of fowls
that is called for by the said instructions. The Indians who will
not raise them can be and shall be fined one toston, which is to be
applied equally to the support of the two hospitals in this city,
those for the Spaniards and for the natives; but no other fines or
costs are to be collected from them. They shall keep a book with an
account and a report, in which they shall enter the said condemnations
in legal form--wherein they shall take great care and diligence, so
that the provisions of this act may be better enforced. In order that
the said natives may not pretend ignorance, the said alcaldes-mayor,
upon receipt of a copy of this act, authorized by the present notary,
shall have it proclaimed in the villages under their jurisdiction, with
the number of fowls that must be raised, so that the said penalties
may be imposed with more rectitude and justification. By this act,
they so voted, ordered, and decreed, and they ordained that this act
be inscribed in the book of this royal Audiencia.

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almaçan_
The licentiate _Albaro Çambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act relating to slavery_.

In the city of Manila, on the second of October, one thousand five
hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancillería of the Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas they had been informed that in the province of Pampanga
were many native slaves, divided among many masters--one slave often
serving ten masters, more or less--whence resulted great disservice
to God our Lord, on account of the vexations, troubles, and great
injuries received by the said slaves in serving so many masters;
and whereas they had ordered Benito de Mendiola, alcalde-mayor of the
said province, to inform himself regarding what should be done in this
matter in order to repair such wrongs; and whereas the latter, in a
petition, presented before the aforesaid Audiencia, has informed them
that no satisfactory division of the slaves is made among the heirs,
and that on this account they may be appraised at the common value and
appraisal, and when they are sold the purchase-price should be divided
among the heirs; and, if after being appraised, one of them retains
a slave, he should pay the other heirs for their share: therefore,
because the said opinion seemed a fair method of procedure, they
ordered, and they did so order, the said alcalde-mayor of Pampanga,
now and henceforth, to take particular care in such cases to observe
the said plan--so that such slaves shall not have so many owners,
nor endure, or be vexed with, the service of so many masters, whom
they cannot serve without considerable trouble. It often happens
that they run away from their masters, or are ill-treated and not
supplied with food and other things necessary to their life. The said
alcalde-mayor shall be advised to execute and enforce the tenor of this
act, being warned that, if he shall not do so, vigorous proceedings
will be instituted against him. By this act, they so voted, ordered,
and decreed, providing that this act be entered in the books of this
royal Audiencia.

_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almaçan_
The licentiate _Albaro Çambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act decreeing a proper regulation of supplies_.

In the city of Manila, on the fifteenth day of the month of October,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands, being assembled,
declared that at present there is a great lack of provisions in this
city, and that those that are to be had are so high-priced, that there
is general suffering. It is thought that, unless this be regulated,
the trouble will increase in the future.

_Buffalo meat_. Therefore they ordered that a contract should be made
with ten Indian arquebusiers, from among those who have permission to
hunt, so that what buffaloes they kill shall be brought for public
sale at the city slaughter-house; and there shall be there every
day the meat of at least one buffalo, which is to be weighed out and
distributed to the citizens.

_The natives and Sangleys must raise fowl and swine. Item_: They voted
and ordered that, now and henceforth, all the natives of these islands,
and the Sangley gardeners who reside therein, shall raise fowl and
swine, as they are ordered, under penalty of a fine of four reals
apiece--three of these to be applied to the use of the hospitals
of this city, and one to the alguazil-mayor or judge who executes
this decree. To that end, the necessary orders shall be despatched,
directed to the magistrates, charging them with the enforcement
thereof, and warning them that especial attention will be paid to
their observance of them, when their residencias are taken.

_That the natives shall bring their provisions for sale to this
city_. Likewise, they ordered the said alcaldes-mayor and magistrates
to be charged and ordered to procure and give orders, each one in his
jurisdiction, to the Indians to come to this city with fowl, swine,
wine, rice, olive-oil, vinegar, and other provisions which they may
have, to sell in this city, for the provision thereof. They are to come
directed to the president, so that he may have some one commissioned to
distribute the provisions without injury to their owners, and at their
full value. Especial care is to be taken in the execution of this.

_That pork shall be sold in the public square at a counter, by weight
and assize_. Further, they ordered that, neither in this city nor
its suburbs, nor in the Sangley and native settlements, shall any
person offer for sale or sell, a dead hog or parts thereof, in the
streets or in their houses, unless it is brought to the square or
the Parian, or any other place that shall be assigned therefor by
the magistrate. There it shall be sold publicly at a counter, by
weight and at fixed rates, under penalty of confiscation of whatever
is found on sale in any other way--which shall go to the alguazil or
judge executing this decree--and twenty lashes applied to the seller.

_Price at which hens, chickens, and capons shall be bought and
sold. Item_: In order that the dearness of the price of fowls may cease
(for they are the principal sustenance of this land), and because it
is just that there shall be a common and general price for all, they
ordered that no person--Spanish, Sangley, native, or other, of any
quality, rank, or condition whatever--may sell or cause to be sold in
this city, or within a radius of five leagues thereof, hens, capons,
and chickens, whether of their own breeding, or of their income,
profit, or property, in any way whatsoever, at a higher price than
the following: a laying Sangley hen, two and one-half reals; a Moro
hen, two reals; a male chicken, one real; a pullet, one and one-half
reals; a Sangley capon, three and one-half reals--under this penalty,
that whoever shall be found selling at a higher price shall lose the
fowls which are thus sold, which shall be divided into three parts,
among the hospitals of this city, and the informer or the judge who
shall execute this decree. At this price those who have fowls shall be
obliged to give them to anyone who would buy. The justices are charged
and ordered to take care to have this scale observed and enforced in
their jurisdictions, with the utmost strictness. It shall be proclaimed
and published therein, that no one may plead ignorance thereof.

_That provisions shall be allowed to be sold freely._ Further, they
ordered that all provisions shall be freely offered, and those who
bring them shall sell them at their pleasure and free will: and no
person in this city, or its suburbs and settlements, shall dare to
take by force, or against their will, from the Indians or Sangleys,
what they bring to sell, or cause them any injury or molestation
therein, under penalty of being severely punished.

_That those who sell fish and other provisions shall maintain the
fixed rates_. They also ordered that those who sell fish and other
provisions, shall abide by the fixed rates which are established,
under the penalties imposed for the violation of them. This act
shall be publicly proclaimed in this city, and in the Sangley Parian,
and in the settlements of Tondo, in order that all may know of it.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almazan_
The licentiate _Albaro Çambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act relating to the importation to this city, from the neighboring
provinces, of fowls, swine, and eggs, for the ordinary allotment_.

In the city of Manila, on the seventh day of the month of December,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors
of the royal Audiencia and Chancillería residing in the said city,
examined the petition of the protector of the natives of these
islands, presented in the name of the inhabitants of Tondo and its
district, in regard to their ordering that this city of Manila should
be provided with the fowls and swine necessary for its sustenance,
from all the provinces and villages of this neighborhood, allotting
among them equitably what each one is obliged to furnish, so that no
one be overburdened; but, since all this has been thus done until now,
the said village and tributes of his Majesty are being depopulated and
growing smaller. The said Audiencia having likewise seen the want and
necessity which has existed, and exists at present, of the said fowls,
swine, and eggs, for the sustenance of this city--although, to remedy
the difficulty, the said president and auditors have enacted other
ordinances and acts--they declared that, in order that the provisions
of the said act may be better fulfilled, and with greater ease and
convenience, and less vexation to the natives, since the inhabitants
of each one of the villages of these environs know what assistance
they owe, they [the Audiencia] ought to order, and they did so order,
that, now and henceforth, the alcaldes-mayor of these environs of
Manila--namely, those of Tondo, Pampanga, Bulacan, Laguna, Mindoro,
Balayan--shall be under the obligation of providing this city from
their said districts with the fowls, swine, and eggs necessary for
its sustenance, at the time and in the quantity and order following.

First, the year shall be apportioned and divided as follows for
each alcalde-mayor: That of Tondo, the first three months of the
year--January, February, and March. That of Pampanga, the next three
months--April, May, and June. That of Bulacan, the next two months--for
the inhabitants of Bulacan, July and August. That of Laguna, the next
two months--for the inhabitants of Laguna, September and October. That
of Mindoro and Balayan, the next two months--November and December.

They are charged and ordered to take particular care to be punctual
in entering upon their months without awaiting any other orders,
and to send to this city each week, until their term is finished, to
the person who shall be nominated and appointed, three hundred laying
hens--the fourth or third part of them pullets, at the rate of four
small ones or two large ones for one laying fowl--and likewise two
thousand eggs, and the number of swine that he may consider proper,
and that can be produced. And the said person, as soon as he shall
receive them, shall distribute them all in due order and form, to those
persons and in the manner ordained and ordered, paying immediately
those who brought them, according to the scale imposed by this royal
Audiencia--advising the natives that during Lent, in place of fowls,
they must send eggs.

In order that this act may be better enforced, and that nothing may
arise to obstruct or hinder its fulfilment (inasmuch as it has been
ordered, by other acts, that all the natives shall raise the said
fowls and swine, under certain penalties), the said alcaldes-mayor are
again charged to exert all care in this matter, so that the natives may
easily furnish what is assigned to and ordered from them. Furthermore,
there shall be no Sangleys (whether infidels or Christians), or native
chiefs or timaguas, excused from undertaking the said breeding, and
furnishing the said allotment, since it is important for their own
welfare, utility, and profit. The said reservation shall be observed
in regard to everything else therein contained; and they ordered all
the said alcaldes-mayor to issue letters and royal decrees, with this
act inserted therein, in order that the provisions herein contained
may begin to be observed from the first of January of the coming
year, one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, beginning with
Tondo and continuing with the other places in the said order. And
the said alcaldes-mayor shall be notified that, just as care will
be taken to reward them for the care and diligence that they shall
exert in its fulfilment, in like manner those who do not observe it
will be punished; and orders will be given to take especial account
in their residencias of the carelessness or neglect observed by them
in this. Thus they decreed and ordered, and affixed their signatures.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almaçan_
The licentiate _Albaro Çambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act ordering the auditor last appointed to audit the accounts of
this city for the past year XCVIII_.

In the city of Manila, on the nineteenth of December, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas the king
our sovereign, by one of his royal ordinances, ordains and orders the
aforesaid, that one auditor of this his royal Audiencia shall each
year audit the accounts of this city; and that they shall commence
with the last elected, and that each year they shall continue with the
rest of the auditors in their turn: therefore, in conformity with the
said royal ordinance, and in order exactly to enforce its provisions,
they ordered, and they did so order, that the licentiate Albaro
Çambrano, auditor of this royal Audiencia, beginning the aforesaid,
shall immediately audit the said accounts of this city for the past
year of ninety-eight, ordering and providing therefor whatever is
necessary. To that end, and for any act connected with and concerning
it, they gave him power and full commission, as far as is required by
law. In future years the other members, in their turn, shall continue
to audit the said accounts annually, as is here declared. Thus they
voted, and ordered it to be registered as an act, and signed the same.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almaçan_
The licentiate _Albaro Çambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act decreeing that the residencias of the faithful administrators
of this city shall be taken every two months._

In the city of Manila, on the nineteenth of December, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas the king
our sovereign, in one of his royal ordinances, ordains and commands
that the said president and auditors shall take a residencia every
two months of the faithful administrators of the city in which this
his royal Audiencia shall reside: therefore, in order that the said
royal ordinance may be exactly enforced, and his Majesty's royal
will observed and enforced in everything, they ordered, and they
did so order, that from the first day of January of the coming year,
one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine, and thenceforth, the said
decree shall take effect. They appointed therefor the licentiate Albaro
Çambrano, auditor of this royal Audiencia, to take the said residencia
of the said regidors and faithful administrators who have filled the
said offices, and to take from them an account of how they employed
their time in the past, and up to the said day. This shall be done in
due form, and in conformity with the law. And they gave him power and
full commission therefor, as far as the law required. In the future,
the said residencia shall continue to be taken every two months by
the said auditors--the licentiate Tellez Almaçan, and Doctor Antonio
de Morga, each in his turn, and in the aforesaid manner, to succeed
the licentiate Albaro Çambrano. By this act they so provided, ordered,
and appointed.

_Don Francisco Tello_
_Doctor Antonio de Morga_
The licentiate _Tellez Almaçan_
The licentiate _Albaro Çambrano_

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

An act decreeing that the auditors shall keep a
record of the suits concerning the royal exchequer.

In the city of Manila, on the nineteenth of December, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the
royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas
the king our sovereign, in one of his royal ordinances, orders and
commands the aforesaid to keep a record of the suits and affairs of
the royal exchequer; and that on Thursday of each week the senior
auditor, his Majesty's fiscal, the royal officials, and the notary
of the royal treasury shall hold a meeting: therefore, in order that
the provisions of the said ordinance may be strictly enforced, they
ordered, and they did so order, that the said record be made. And
considering that Thursdays are days for judicial decisions, and that
on this account they cannot attend to the aforesaid matter, the said
meetings shall be on Tuesday afternoons in the royal offices--at
which shall be present Doctor Antonio de Morga, the senior auditor of
this royal Audiencia, his Majesty's fiscal, and the royal judicial
officers, together with the notary of the royal treasury, according
as the king our sovereign orders and commands in the said ordinance,
exercising in everything requisite and necessary care and expedition
for the increase and preservation of the said royal exchequer. By
this act they so declared, ordered, and decreed.

Before me: _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act decreeing that an account of the resources of his Majesty's
exchequer in these islands be sent to the royal Council of the Indias_.

In the city of Manila, on the nineteenth of December, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancillería of the Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas the king our sovereign in one of his royal ordinances, orders
and commands the aforesaid president and auditors that the official
judges of his Majesty's exchequer shall send in account to his royal
Council of the resources of his exchequer in these islands, with their
signatures affixed, together with those of the aforesaid president
and auditors: therefore, in conformity with the said royal ordinance,
and in order that its provisions may be strictly enforced, they
ordered, and they did so order, that the said official judges shall
be notified to give orders immediately to have a true report made,
with entire clearness, and without any reservation, of the resources
of his Majesty's estate in these islands, and under their charge,
and of their disbursements and expenses. As soon as the said report
is made, copies in duplicate shall be sent to the king our sovereign,
in his royal Council of the Indias, by the first ships sailing from
these islands for Nueva España, in the form that his Majesty orders
and commands. By this act they so voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act decreeing that a book shall be prepared in which are registered
the citizens of these islands, with their merits and services_.

In the city of Manila, on the nineteenth of December, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the royal
Audiencia and Chancillería of the Philipinas Islands declared that,
whereas the king our sovereign, in one of his ordinances, orders and
commands the aforesaid president and auditors to prepare a book wherein
to register the inhabitants and dwellers in these islands, and inscribe
their merits and services, and the rewards and remunerations which
have been given them in recompense--a copy of which shall be sent
him in his royal Council of the Indias, so that, when they ask for
rewards, they shall be given what they deserve: therefore, in order
that the royal will of the king our sovereign be strictly observed,
enforced, and fulfilled, they ordered, and they did so order, the
said book, for the said purpose, to be made immediately; and when all
that his Majesty orders and commands in the said royal ordinance is
finished and completed, copies shall be made in duplicate and sent on
the first ships leaving these islands for Nueva España, to the king
our sovereign in his said royal Council. By this act they so voted,
ordered, and decreed.

Before me:

_Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_

_An act decreeing that the treasurer of the royal exchequer shall
collect all the fines that are in any wise imposed by this royal
Audiencia_.

In the city of Manila, on the nineteenth of December, one thousand
five hundred and ninety-eight, the president and auditors of the
royal Audiencia of the Philipinas Islands declared that, whereas the
king our sovereign, in one of his ordinances, orders and commands the
said Audiencia, that the treasurer of his Majesty's royal exchequer
in these islands shall collect all the fines that are in any wise
imposed by this royal Audiencia, which are to be applied both to
the use of the royal treasury, and to the courts and other judicial
expenses; that the chief alguazil of this court shall have charge of
executing them; that whatever the said treasurer collects, he is to
present immediately to the officials of the royal exchequer; that
the aforesaid officials shall place it in the chest with the three
keys; that they shall enter in a book all that they may collect from
such fines, placing on one side the fines for the royal treasury,
and on the other those of the courts; that the aforesaid officials
shall take care that charge of them is given to the said treasurer;
that the latter, at the end of each year, shall audit the said fines;
and that then a succinct report of them shall be sent to the royal
Council of the Indias, signed with his name and the names of the
other officials, together with the certification of the court notary
of this royal Audiencia, of the fines that shall have been imposed:
therefore, in conformity with the said royal ordinance, and in
order that its provisions may be strictly enforced, they ordered,
and they did so order, that the official judges of his Majesty's
royal exchequer in these islands be notified to observe and enforce
thoroughly the provisions of the said royal ordinance of which mention
is here made, _in toto_, without failing in any point, each one in
matters concerning him, just as is here declared. Nor shall the said
fines be expended, under any consideration, otherwise than shall be
specified by this royal Audiencia, under penalty that whoever shall
order them otherwise disbursed shall repay the amount from his own
pocket. By this act they so voted, ordered, and decreed.

Before me: _Pedro Hurtado Desquibel_





_Bibliographical Data_


All documents in this volume--translated from either the originals or
transcriptions thereof--are obtained from MSS. in the Archivo general
de Indias, Sevilla; their pressmarks are indicated as follows:

1. _Letter from Morga_, June 30, 1597--"Simancas-Secular; Audiencia
de Filipinas; cartas y expedientes del presidente y oidores de dicha
Audiencia vistos en el Consejo; años 1583 á 1599; est. 67, caj. 6,
leg. 18."

2. _Administration of hospital._--The same as No. 1.

3. _Letters from Tello_, 1597.--The same as No. 1--except letter of
June 22, "Simancas-Secular; cartas y espedientes del gobernador de
Filipinas vistos en el Consejo; años 1567 á 1599; est. 67, caj. 6,
leg. 6."

4. _Letter from Ronquillo_.--The same as No. 1.

5. _Report by Morga_.--The same as No. 1.

6. _Recommendations as to reforms_.--"Simancas-Secular; Audiencia
de Filipinas; cartas y espedientes de personas seculares de dicha
Audiencia vistos en el Consejo; año's de 1565 á 1594; est. 67, caj. 6,
leg. 34."

7. _Reception of royal seal_.--The same as No. 1--except "Años de 1600
á 1612; est. 67, caj. 6, leg. 19." The dates would indicate that this
MS. is misplaced in the archives.

8. _Letters from the archbishop_, 1598.--"Simancas-Secular; Audiencia
de Filipinas; cartas y expedientes del arzobispo de Manila vistos en
el Consejo; años de 1579 á 1679; est. 68, caj. 1, leg. 32."

9. _Letters from Benavides_.--"Simancas-Secular; Audiencia de
Filipinas; cartas y espedientes de los obispos sufragáneos de Manila;
1598 á 1698; est. 68, caj. 1, leg. 34."

10. _Letters from Tello_, 1598--The same as No. 3 (June 22).

11. _Report of the Audiencia_.--The same as No. 1.

12. _Letter to the archbishop_.-"Audiencia de Filipinas; registros
de oficio; reales ordenes dirigidas a las autoridades del distrito
de la Audiencia; años de 1597 á 1634; est. 105, caj. 2, leg. 1."

13. _Missions of the religious orders_.--"Simancas-Filipinas;
descubrimientos, descripciones y poblaciones de las Islas Filipinas;
años de 1582 á 1606; est. 1, caj. 1, leg. 3|25."

14. _Letters from Tello_, 1599.--The same as No. 3 (June 22).

15. _Ordinances by the Audiencia_. The same as No. 1.







NOTES

[1] See Morga's account of the martyrdom of the Franciscans, in
his _Sucesos_ (Hakluyt Soc. trans.), pp. 78-84; and that by Santa
Inés, in his _Crónica_, ii, pp. 273-581, 621-644. The latter writer
furnishes also biographical sketches of the martyrs (among whom was
Pedro Baptista). They were canonized in 1862.

Taikô-sama was a name adopted by Hideyoshi in 1591, when he made a
partial abdication of his power in favor of an adopted son. He died
in September, 1598.

[2] This confraternity was founded (1594) at Manila by a priest
named Juan Fernandez de León, who came to the islands in 1591. The
association was planned in imitation of that at Lisboa, and included
prominent members of all the orders, as well as secular persons. Its
first presiding officer was Luis Pérez Dasmariñas. In conjunction
with the Franciscans, the Confraternity of La Misericordia ("mercy")
administered the hospital for many years. See Santa Inés's _Crónica_,
ii, pp. 200-215.

[3] This was Fray Martin de León, according to Santa Inés (_Crónica_,
ii, p. 270).

[4] Food prepared from the sago-palm (see _Vol_. IV, p. 276).

[5] Husk of the cocoa-nut (Retana's edition of Zúñiga's _Estadismo_,
ii, p. 449*).

[6] _Ketchil_, a Malay word signifying "little, young;" hence a
young man of distinction, a son or brother of the Molucca princes:
in Amboina it is the designation of the heir-apparent. Marsden's
_Dictionary_, cited by Stanley, in his translation of Morga (Hakluyt
Soc. publications), p. 59.

[7] The salambao is a raft of reeds or bamboo; on which is erected an
apparatus not unlike the mast and yard of a square-rigged ship. To
one end of the yard is attached a net which may be raised from and
lowered into the water. This contrivance is called by the natives
_timba_. See full description of the salambao, and of other native
modes of fishing, in Zúñiga's _Estadismo_ (Retana's ed.), i, pp. 199,
200; and illustration of this apparatus in F. Jagor's _Travels in
the Philippines_ (London, 1875), p. 47.

[8] "The black people or Caffares of the land of Mozambique, and
all the coast of Ethiopia and within the land to the Cape de Bona
Speranza." ... "The Portingales do make a living by buying and selling
of them" (Linschoten's _Voyage_ (Hakluyt Soc. trans., London, 1885),
vol. i, pp. 269, 277).

[9] _Blanca_: half a maravedi, equivalent to nearly one mill in
U.S. money.

[10] A law dated 1556 provides that jettisons are to be reckoned as
risks in common, and to be distributed among ship, freight-money,
and cargo. See _Recop. leyes Indias_ (ed. 1841), lib. ix, tit. xxxix,
ley x.

[11] Apparently referring to Fray Marcelo de Rivadeneira, one of the
Franciscans who went to Japan with Pedro Baptista. Rivadeneira wrote
a book, _Historia de las islas del Archipiélago_, etc. (Barcelona,
M.DC.I), which describes the countries of Eastern Asia, and relates
the history of Franciscan missions therein.

[12] In the Archivo general de Indias, Sevilla, is a document which
contains the following statement: "I, Captain Joan de Bustamante,
accountant and official judge of the royal exchequer of the Filipinas
islands, certify that, according to the books, accounts, and papers of
the office and records of the said royal exchequer, it is not, since
the past year of fifteen hundred and eighty-one, when the cathedral
church of this city was founded by Don Fray Domingo de Salazar, first
bishop of these islands, up to the present year of fifteen hundred
and ninety-nine, evident nor apparent that there have been given from
the royal exchequer to the said church any bells, images, ornaments,
chalices, candelabra, missals, or choir-books for the service thereof;
nor has there been paid over for that purpose any coins of gold, as
appears by the said books and papers to which I refer. In certification
whereof, and that this may be apparent, I have, on the petition of the
dean and chapter, _sede vacante_, given these presents in Manila on the
fifth of July of the year one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine."

[13] _Vosotros_: the familiar form of the second person plural of
the personal pronoun; its use in this case was a mark of contempt
for his audience.

[14] The convent of San Francisco del Monte was situated at
somewhat more than a league from Manila; and an estate was granted
to the Franciscan order by Santiago de Vera, for the support of the
convent. See Santa Inés's _Crónica_, i, pp. 531-534, for full account
of its foundation.

[15] This dignitary was Fray Miguel Benavides, of the Dominican order;
see _Vol_. VII, p. 234.

[16] Morga says of this affair, in his _Sucesos_ (Hakluyt Soc. trans.),
p. 62: "Ronquillo was set at liberty on showing a private letter
from the governor, which he had sent him separately with the first
instructions, ordering him in any case to come to Manila with all his
forces, because he wanted them for other necessities of the islands;
and Don Juan said that on the strength of that letter he had not
waited for second instructions."

[17] According to Morga, this chief was killed by some of his own
followers, to gain the reward offered by the Spaniards.

[18] Span., _negros çambales_. It is possible that _y_ was omitted by
some error; or it may mean the blacks who lived in the hill-country
of the Zambales district. The Zambales were a Malay tribe; but, as
we have already seen (_Vol_. VIII, p. 218), their revolt against the
Spaniards in 1591-92 was in association with the Negritos of that
region. As will be remembered, the Zambales surviving that revolt
were placed in new settlements in other districts.

[19] Another corruption of Kuwambaku, the official appellation of
Hideyoshi, then ruler of Japan (see _Vol_. VIII, p. 262, and note 42).

[20] Morga states that Navarrete, after sending the letter to Tello
died at Nangasaki.

[21] Gaspar de Zúñiga y Acebedo, Conde de Monterey, was viceroy of
Nueva España from September 18, 1595, to September, 1603, when he
became viceroy of Peru; he died in March, 1606, while in the latter
office.

[22] This statement is somewhat blindly worded; but Tello apparently
means that the viceroy, to save expense to the royal treasury, sends
government supplies to the Philippines on private ships; and, instead
of paying the owners freight thereon, he permits them, contrary to
the royal decrees, to carry money to the islands for investment,
on which they make enormous profits.

[23] This letter was addressed to Felipe II; but of course its
writer had not then received news of the king's death, which occurred
September 13, 1598; he was succeeded by his son, Felipe III (_Vol_. 1,
p. 353).

[24] See list of encomiendas existing in 1591 (_Vol_. VIII); this
encomienda is there named Passi.

[25] These italic paragraphs are a part of the letter itself. The
matter included in brackets and preceded by the words "_In the margin_"
is remarks written in Spain.

[26] The letters or words in brackets are conjectural readings, the
original being illegible or worn in many places. When no conjectural
reading is given, the break is indicated by leaders.

[27] A sort of vessel with lateen-rigged sails, used in the Levant
trade; the name is of Arabic origin.

[28] Thus in original--apparently a misnumbering of paragraphs.

[29] See La Concepcion's account of Dasmariñas's unfortunate expedition
(_Hist. de Philipinas_, iii, pp. 231-277).

[30] Bolinao is the name of a cape at the northwest extremity of the
peninsula of Zambales, Luzón; also applied to a narrow channel between
that cape and the small island of Santiago. The submarine cable from
Hongkong formerly landed here, but now reaches Manila direct.

[31] The paragraphs in italics which accompany the sections of Tello's
letter are apparently brief summaries thereof, made by some clerk
for the use of the Council of the Indias.

[32] Referring to the diocese of Nueva Cáceres (also known as
Camarines). It was offered successively to three Franciscans, two of
whom declined the honor; the third, Fray Pedro Bautista, was already
a martyr in Japan when the royal decree arrived at Manila. The office
was finally conferred (1600) upon Francisco de Ortega, O.S.A. Benavides
was the first bishop of Nueva Segovia, and Agurto of Cebú.

[33] A grant of graces, indulgences, and dispensations awarded by
the Holy See to the faithful of either sex, inhabitants of Spain,
Portugal, their colonies, and the kingdom of Naples. The condition
requisite for the enjoyment of these favors is the contribution yearly
of a small alms for the support of divine worship and maintenance of
institutions of beneficence, as hospitals, asylums, and the like. Among
the privileges granted are absolution from reserved cases, commutation
of vows, exemption from abstinence and fasts, and so on. In former ages
the alms thus contributed were employed in battles against infidels and
heretics. The document empowering the recipient of the above favors
to make use of them must be printed on stamped paper, and sealed and
signed by the commissary-general apostolic delegated therefor by the
Holy See. The dispensation must be renewed yearly. Moroni--_Dizionario_
(Venezia, 1840), v, 283-285--states that, from the revenue thus
received from the Crusade sales annually, the following amounts are
turned over to the Basilica of Sts. Peter and Paul in the Vatican,
for its support, viz.: by Spain, $12,000; by Portugal, $4,000; by
Brazil, $2,000; by Naples, about $700. (See Ferraris--_Bibliotheca_,
art. "Bulla Cruciatæ.")--_Rev. T.C. Middleton_, O.S.A.

[34] Another appellation of the diocese of Nueva Segovia, which
comprised the province of Cagayan.

[35] This was Fray Pedro de Agurto, bishop of Cebú; his official
appellation in the text is derived from the name of the capital city
of Cebú. Agurto was a native of Mexico; he became a friar in the
Augustinian order, in which he filled many important posts. He took
possession of his diocese of Cebú on October 14, 1598, and died at
Cebú on the tenth anniversary of that day (1608).






End of Project Gutenberg's The Philippine Islands, 1493-1898, by E. H. Blair

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, 1493-1898 ***

***** This file should be named 14266-8.txt or 14266-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/2/6/14266/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the PG Distributed Proofreaders Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
